PART II


As we walked rapidly down Howe Street I glanced back at the building
which we had left. There, dimly outlined at the top window, I could see
the shadow of a head, a woman’s head, gazing tensely, rigidly, out into
the night, waiting with breathless suspense for the renewal of that
interrupted message. At the doorway of the Howe Street flats a man,
muffled in a cravat and greatcoat, was leaning against the railing. He
started as the hall-light fell upon our faces.

“Holmes!” he cried.

“Why, Gregson!” said my companion as he shook hands with the Scotland
Yard detective. “Journeys end with lovers’ meetings. What brings you
here?”

“The same reasons that bring you, I expect,” said Gregson. “How you got
on to it I can’t imagine.”

“Different threads, but leading up to the same tangle. I’ve been taking
the signals.”

“Signals?”

“Yes, from that window. They broke off in the middle. We came over to
see the reason. But since it is safe in your hands I see no object in
continuing this business.”

“Wait a bit!” cried Gregson eagerly. “I’ll do you this justice, Mr.
Holmes, that I was never in a case yet that I didn’t feel stronger for
having you on my side. There’s only the one exit to these flats, so we
have him safe.”

“Who is he?”

“Well, well, we score over you for once, Mr. Holmes. You must give us
best this time.” He struck his stick sharply upon the ground, on which
a cabman, his whip in his hand, sauntered over from a four-wheeler
which stood on the far side of the street. “May I introduce you to Mr.
Sherlock Holmes?” he said to the cabman. “This is Mr. Leverton, of
Pinkerton’s American Agency.”

“The hero of the Long Island cave mystery?” said Holmes. “Sir, I am
pleased to meet you.”

The American, a quiet, businesslike young man, with a clean-shaven,
hatchet face, flushed up at the words of commendation. “I am on the
trail of my life now, Mr. Holmes,” said he. “If I can get Gorgiano—”

“What! Gorgiano of the Red Circle?”

“Oh, he has a European fame, has he? Well, we’ve learned all about him
in America. We _know_ he is at the bottom of fifty murders, and yet we
have nothing positive we can take him on. I tracked him over from New
York, and I’ve been close to him for a week in London, waiting some
excuse to get my hand on his collar. Mr. Gregson and I ran him to
ground in that big tenement house, and there’s only one door, so he
can’t slip us. There’s three folk come out since he went in, but I’ll
swear he wasn’t one of them.”

“Mr. Holmes talks of signals,” said Gregson. “I expect, as usual, he
knows a good deal that we don’t.”

In a few clear words Holmes explained the situation as it had appeared
to us. The American struck his hands together with vexation.

“He’s on to us!” he cried.

“Why do you think so?”

“Well, it figures out that way, does it not? Here he is, sending out
messages to an accomplice—there are several of his gang in London. Then
suddenly, just as by your own account he was telling them that there
was danger, he broke short off. What could it mean except that from the
window he had suddenly either caught sight of us in the street, or in
some way come to understand how close the danger was, and that he must
act right away if he was to avoid it? What do you suggest, Mr. Holmes?”

“That we go up at once and see for ourselves.”

“But we have no warrant for his arrest.”

“He is in unoccupied premises under suspicious circumstances,” said
Gregson. “That is good enough for the moment. When we have him by the
heels we can see if New York can’t help us to keep him. I’ll take the
responsibility of arresting him now.”

Our official detectives may blunder in the matter of intelligence, but
never in that of courage. Gregson climbed the stair to arrest this
desperate murderer with the same absolutely quiet and businesslike
bearing with which he would have ascended the official staircase of
Scotland Yard. The Pinkerton man had tried to push past him, but
Gregson had firmly elbowed him back. London dangers were the privilege
of the London force.

The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standing
ajar. Gregson pushed it open. Within all was absolute silence and
darkness. I struck a match and lit the detective’s lantern. As I did
so, and as the flicker steadied into a flame, we all gave a gasp of
surprise. On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there was outlined
a fresh track of blood. The red steps pointed towards us and led away
from an inner room, the door of which was closed. Gregson flung it open
and held his light full blaze in front of him, while we all peered
eagerly over his shoulders.

In the middle of the floor of the empty room was huddled the figure of
an enormous man, his clean-shaven, swarthy face grotesquely horrible in
its contortion and his head encircled by a ghastly crimson halo of
blood, lying in a broad wet circle upon the white woodwork. His knees
were drawn up, his hands thrown out in agony, and from the centre of
his broad, brown, upturned throat there projected the white haft of a
knife driven blade-deep into his body. Giant as he was, the man must
have gone down like a pole-axed ox before that terrific blow. Beside
his right hand a most formidable horn-handled, two-edged dagger lay
upon the floor, and near it a black kid glove.

“By George! it’s Black Gorgiano himself!” cried the American detective.
“Someone has got ahead of us this time.”

“Here is the candle in the window, Mr. Holmes,” said Gregson. “Why,
whatever are you doing?”

Holmes had stepped across, had lit the candle, and was passing it
backward and forward across the window-panes. Then he peered into the
darkness, blew the candle out, and threw it on the floor.

“I rather think that will be helpful,” said he. He came over and stood
in deep thought while the two professionals were examining the body.
“You say that three people came out from the flat while you were
waiting downstairs,” said he at last. “Did you observe them closely?”

“Yes, I did.”

“Was there a fellow about thirty, black-bearded, dark, of middle size?”

“Yes; he was the last to pass me.”

“That is your man, I fancy. I can give you his description, and we have
a very excellent outline of his footmark. That should be enough for
you.”

“Not much, Mr. Holmes, among the millions of London.”

“Perhaps not. That is why I thought it best to summon this lady to your
aid.”

We all turned round at the words. There, framed in the doorway, was a
tall and beautiful woman—the mysterious lodger of Bloomsbury. Slowly
she advanced, her face pale and drawn with a frightful apprehension,
her eyes fixed and staring, her terrified gaze riveted upon the dark
figure on the floor.

“You have killed him!” she muttered. “Oh, _Dio mio_, you have killed
him!” Then I heard a sudden sharp intake of her breath, and she sprang
into the air with a cry of joy. Round and round the room she danced,
her hands clapping, her dark eyes gleaming with delighted wonder, and a
thousand pretty Italian exclamations pouring from her lips. It was
terrible and amazing to see such a woman so convulsed with joy at such
a sight. Suddenly she stopped and gazed at us all with a questioning
stare.

“But you! You are police, are you not? You have killed Giuseppe
Gorgiano. Is it not so?”

“We are police, madam.”

She looked round into the shadows of the room.

“But where, then, is Gennaro?” she asked. “He is my husband, Gennaro
Lucca. I am Emilia Lucca, and we are both from New York. Where is
Gennaro? He called me this moment from this window, and I ran with all
my speed.”

“It was I who called,” said Holmes.

“You! How could you call?”

“Your cipher was not difficult, madam. Your presence here was
desirable. I knew that I had only to flash ‘_Vieni_’ and you would
surely come.”

The beautiful Italian looked with awe at my companion.

“I do not understand how you know these things,” she said. “Giuseppe
Gorgiano—how did he—” She paused, and then suddenly her face lit up
with pride and delight. “Now I see it! My Gennaro! My splendid,
beautiful Gennaro, who has guarded me safe from all harm, he did it,
with his own strong hand he killed the monster! Oh, Gennaro, how
wonderful you are! What woman could ever be worthy of such a man?”

“Well, Mrs. Lucca,” said the prosaic Gregson, laying his hand upon the
lady’s sleeve with as little sentiment as if she were a Notting Hill
hooligan, “I am not very clear yet who you are or what you are; but
you’ve said enough to make it very clear that we shall want you at the
Yard.”

“One moment, Gregson,” said Holmes. “I rather fancy that this lady may
be as anxious to give us information as we can be to get it. You
understand, madam, that your husband will be arrested and tried for the
death of the man who lies before us? What you say may be used in
evidence. But if you think that he has acted from motives which are not
criminal, and which he would wish to have known, then you cannot serve
him better than by telling us the whole story.”

“Now that Gorgiano is dead we fear nothing,” said the lady. “He was a
devil and a monster, and there can be no judge in the world who would
punish my husband for having killed him.”

“In that case,” said Holmes, “my suggestion is that we lock this door,
leave things as we found them, go with this lady to her room, and form
our opinion after we have heard what it is that she has to say to us.”

Half an hour later we were seated, all four, in the small sitting-room
of Signora Lucca, listening to her remarkable narrative of those
sinister events, the ending of which we had chanced to witness. She
spoke in rapid and fluent but very unconventional English, which, for
the sake of clearness, I will make grammatical.

“I was born in Posilippo, near Naples,” said she, “and was the daughter
of Augusto Barelli, who was the chief lawyer and once the deputy of
that part. Gennaro was in my father’s employment, and I came to love
him, as any woman must. He had neither money nor position—nothing but
his beauty and strength and energy—so my father forbade the match. We
fled together, were married at Bari, and sold my jewels to gain the
money which would take us to America. This was four years ago, and we
have been in New York ever since.

“Fortune was very good to us at first. Gennaro was able to do a service
to an Italian gentleman—he saved him from some ruffians in the place
called the Bowery, and so made a powerful friend. His name was Tito
Castalotte, and he was the senior partner of the great firm of
Castalotte and Zamba, who are the chief fruit importers of New York.
Signor Zamba is an invalid, and our new friend Castalotte has all power
within the firm, which employs more than three hundred men. He took my
husband into his employment, made him head of a department, and showed
his good-will towards him in every way. Signor Castalotte was a
bachelor, and I believe that he felt as if Gennaro was his son, and
both my husband and I loved him as if he were our father. We had taken
and furnished a little house in Brooklyn, and our whole future seemed
assured when that black cloud appeared which was soon to overspread our
sky.

“One night, when Gennaro returned from his work, he brought a
fellow-countryman back with him. His name was Gorgiano, and he had come
also from Posilippo. He was a huge man, as you can testify, for you
have looked upon his corpse. Not only was his body that of a giant but
everything about him was grotesque, gigantic, and terrifying. His voice
was like thunder in our little house. There was scarce room for the
whirl of his great arms as he talked. His thoughts, his emotions, his
passions, all were exaggerated and monstrous. He talked, or rather
roared, with such energy that others could but sit and listen, cowed
with the mighty stream of words. His eyes blazed at you and held you at
his mercy. He was a terrible and wonderful man. I thank God that he is
dead!

“He came again and again. Yet I was aware that Gennaro was no more
happy than I was in his presence. My poor husband would sit pale and
listless, listening to the endless raving upon politics and upon social
questions which made up our visitor’s conversation. Gennaro said
nothing, but I, who knew him so well, could read in his face some
emotion which I had never seen there before. At first I thought that it
was dislike. And then, gradually, I understood that it was more than
dislike. It was fear—a deep, secret, shrinking fear. That night—the
night that I read his terror—I put my arms round him and I implored him
by his love for me and by all that he held dear to hold nothing from
me, and to tell me why this huge man overshadowed him so.

“He told me, and my own heart grew cold as ice as I listened. My poor
Gennaro, in his wild and fiery days, when all the world seemed against
him and his mind was driven half mad by the injustices of life, had
joined a Neapolitan society, the Red Circle, which was allied to the
old Carbonari. The oaths and secrets of this brotherhood were
frightful, but once within its rule no escape was possible. When we had
fled to America Gennaro thought that he had cast it all off forever.
What was his horror one evening to meet in the streets the very man who
had initiated him in Naples, the giant Gorgiano, a man who had earned
the name of ‘Death’ in the south of Italy, for he was red to the elbow
in murder! He had come to New York to avoid the Italian police, and he
had already planted a branch of this dreadful society in his new home.
All this Gennaro told me and showed me a summons which he had received
that very day, a Red Circle drawn upon the head of it telling him that
a lodge would be held upon a certain date, and that his presence at it
was required and ordered.

“That was bad enough, but worse was to come. I had noticed for some
time that when Gorgiano came to us, as he constantly did, in the
evening, he spoke much to me; and even when his words were to my
husband those terrible, glaring, wild-beast eyes of his were always
turned upon me. One night his secret came out. I had awakened what he
called ‘love’ within him—the love of a brute—a savage. Gennaro had not
yet returned when he came. He pushed his way in, seized me in his
mighty arms, hugged me in his bear’s embrace, covered me with kisses,
and implored me to come away with him. I was struggling and screaming
when Gennaro entered and attacked him. He struck Gennaro senseless and
fled from the house which he was never more to enter. It was a deadly
enemy that we made that night.

“A few days later came the meeting. Gennaro returned from it with a
face which told me that something dreadful had occurred. It was worse
than we could have imagined possible. The funds of the society were
raised by blackmailing rich Italians and threatening them with violence
should they refuse the money. It seems that Castalotte, our dear friend
and benefactor, had been approached. He had refused to yield to
threats, and he had handed the notices to the police. It was resolved
now that such an example should be made of them as would prevent any
other victim from rebelling. At the meeting it was arranged that he and
his house should be blown up with dynamite. There was a drawing of lots
as to who should carry out the deed. Gennaro saw our enemy’s cruel face
smiling at him as he dipped his hand in the bag. No doubt it had been
prearranged in some fashion, for it was the fatal disc with the Red
Circle upon it, the mandate for murder, which lay upon his palm. He was
to kill his best friend, or he was to expose himself and me to the
vengeance of his comrades. It was part of their fiendish system to
punish those whom they feared or hated by injuring not only their own
persons but those whom they loved, and it was the knowledge of this
which hung as a terror over my poor Gennaro’s head and drove him nearly
crazy with apprehension.

“All that night we sat together, our arms round each other, each
strengthening each for the troubles that lay before us. The very next
evening had been fixed for the attempt. By midday my husband and I were
on our way to London, but not before he had given our benefactor full
warning of this danger, and had also left such information for the
police as would safeguard his life for the future.

“The rest, gentlemen, you know for yourselves. We were sure that our
enemies would be behind us like our own shadows. Gorgiano had his
private reasons for vengeance, but in any case we knew how ruthless,
cunning, and untiring he could be. Both Italy and America are full of
stories of his dreadful powers. If ever they were exerted it would be
now. My darling made use of the few clear days which our start had
given us in arranging for a refuge for me in such a fashion that no
possible danger could reach me. For his own part, he wished to be free
that he might communicate both with the American and with the Italian
police. I do not myself know where he lived, or how. All that I learned
was through the columns of a newspaper. But once as I looked through my
window, I saw two Italians watching the house, and I understood that in
some way Gorgiano had found our retreat. Finally Gennaro told me,
through the paper, that he would signal to me from a certain window,
but when the signals came they were nothing but warnings, which were
suddenly interrupted. It is very clear to me now that he knew Gorgiano
to be close upon him, and that, thank God! he was ready for him when he
came. And now, gentleman, I would ask you whether we have anything to
fear from the law, or whether any judge upon earth would condemn my
Gennaro for what he has done?”

“Well, Mr. Gregson,” said the American, looking across at the official,
“I don’t know what your British point of view may be, but I guess that
in New York this lady’s husband will receive a pretty general vote of
thanks.”

“She will have to come with me and see the chief,” Gregson answered.
“If what she says is corroborated, I do not think she or her husband
has much to fear. But what I can’t make head or tail of, Mr. Holmes, is
how on earth _you_ got yourself mixed up in the matter.”

“Education, Gregson, education. Still seeking knowledge at the old
university. Well, Watson, you have one more specimen of the tragic and
grotesque to add to your collection. By the way, it is not eight
o’clock, and a Wagner night at Covent Garden! If we hurry, we might be
in time for the second act.”




The Disappearance of Lady Frances Carfax


“But why Turkish?” asked Mr. Sherlock Holmes, gazing fixedly at my
boots. I was reclining in a cane-backed chair at the moment, and my
protruded feet had attracted his ever-active attention.

“English,” I answered in some surprise. “I got them at Latimer’s, in
Oxford Street.”

Holmes smiled with an expression of weary patience.

“The bath!” he said; “the bath! Why the relaxing and expensive Turkish
rather than the invigorating home-made article?”

“Because for the last few days I have been feeling rheumatic and old. A
Turkish bath is what we call an alterative in medicine—a fresh
starting-point, a cleanser of the system.

“By the way, Holmes,” I added, “I have no doubt the connection between
my boots and a Turkish bath is a perfectly self-evident one to a
logical mind, and yet I should be obliged to you if you would indicate
it.”

“The train of reasoning is not very obscure, Watson,” said Holmes with
a mischievous twinkle. “It belongs to the same elementary class of
deduction which I should illustrate if I were to ask you who shared
your cab in your drive this morning.”

“I don’t admit that a fresh illustration is an explanation,” said I
with some asperity.

“Bravo, Watson! A very dignified and logical remonstrance. Let me see,
what were the points? Take the last one first—the cab. You observe that
you have some splashes on the left sleeve and shoulder of your coat.
Had you sat in the centre of a hansom you would probably have had no
splashes, and if you had they would certainly have been symmetrical.
Therefore it is clear that you sat at the side. Therefore it is equally
clear that you had a companion.”

“That is very evident.”

“Absurdly commonplace, is it not?”

“But the boots and the bath?”

“Equally childish. You are in the habit of doing up your boots in a
certain way. I see them on this occasion fastened with an elaborate
double bow, which is not your usual method of tying them. You have,
therefore, had them off. Who has tied them? A bootmaker—or the boy at
the bath. It is unlikely that it is the bootmaker, since your boots are
nearly new. Well, what remains? The bath. Absurd, is it not? But, for
all that, the Turkish bath has served a purpose.”

“What is that?”

“You say that you have had it because you need a change. Let me suggest
that you take one. How would Lausanne do, my dear Watson—first-class
tickets and all expenses paid on a princely scale?”

“Splendid! But why?”

Holmes leaned back in his armchair and took his notebook from his
pocket.

“One of the most dangerous classes in the world,” said he, “is the
drifting and friendless woman. She is the most harmless and often the
most useful of mortals, but she is the inevitable inciter of crime in
others. She is helpless. She is migratory. She has sufficient means to
take her from country to country and from hotel to hotel. She is lost,
as often as not, in a maze of obscure _pensions_ and boardinghouses.
She is a stray chicken in a world of foxes. When she is gobbled up she
is hardly missed. I much fear that some evil has come to the Lady
Frances Carfax.”

I was relieved at this sudden descent from the general to the
particular. Holmes consulted his notes.

“Lady Frances,” he continued, “is the sole survivor of the direct
family of the late Earl of Rufton. The estates went, as you may
remember, in the male line. She was left with limited means, but with
some very remarkable old Spanish jewellery of silver and curiously cut
diamonds to which she was fondly attached—too attached, for she refused
to leave them with her banker and always carried them about with her. A
rather pathetic figure, the Lady Frances, a beautiful woman, still in
fresh middle age, and yet, by a strange change, the last derelict of
what only twenty years ago was a goodly fleet.”

“What has happened to her, then?”

“Ah, what has happened to the Lady Frances? Is she alive or dead? There
is our problem. She is a lady of precise habits, and for four years it
has been her invariable custom to write every second week to Miss
Dobney, her old governess, who has long retired and lives in
Camberwell. It is this Miss Dobney who has consulted me. Nearly five
weeks have passed without a word. The last letter was from the Hôtel
National at Lausanne. Lady Frances seems to have left there and given
no address. The family are anxious, and as they are exceedingly wealthy
no sum will be spared if we can clear the matter up.”

“Is Miss Dobney the only source of information? Surely she had other
correspondents?”

“There is one correspondent who is a sure draw, Watson. That is the
bank. Single ladies must live, and their passbooks are compressed
diaries. She banks at Silvester’s. I have glanced over her account. The
last check but one paid her bill at Lausanne, but it was a large one
and probably left her with cash in hand. Only one check has been drawn
since.”

“To whom, and where?”

“To Miss Marie Devine. There is nothing to show where the check was
drawn. It was cashed at the Crédit Lyonnais at Montpellier less than
three weeks ago. The sum was fifty pounds.”

“And who is Miss Marie Devine?”

“That also I have been able to discover. Miss Marie Devine was the maid
of Lady Frances Carfax. Why she should have paid her this check we have
not yet determined. I have no doubt, however, that your researches will
soon clear the matter up.”

“_My_ researches!”

“Hence the health-giving expedition to Lausanne. You know that I cannot
possibly leave London while old Abrahams is in such mortal terror of
his life. Besides, on general principles it is best that I should not
leave the country. Scotland Yard feels lonely without me, and it causes
an unhealthy excitement among the criminal classes. Go, then, my dear
Watson, and if my humble counsel can ever be valued at so extravagant a
rate as two pence a word, it waits your disposal night and day at the
end of the Continental wire.”

Two days later found me at the Hôtel National at Lausanne, where I
received every courtesy at the hands of M. Moser, the well-known
manager. Lady Frances, as he informed me, had stayed there for several
weeks. She had been much liked by all who met her. Her age was not more
than forty. She was still handsome and bore every sign of having in her
youth been a very lovely woman. M. Moser knew nothing of any valuable
jewellery, but it had been remarked by the servants that the heavy
trunk in the lady’s bedroom was always scrupulously locked. Marie
Devine, the maid, was as popular as her mistress. She was actually
engaged to one of the head waiters in the hotel, and there was no
difficulty in getting her address. It was 11, Rue de Trajan,
Montpellier. All this I jotted down and felt that Holmes himself could
not have been more adroit in collecting his facts.

Only one corner still remained in the shadow. No light which I
possessed could clear up the cause for the lady’s sudden departure. She
was very happy at Lausanne. There was every reason to believe that she
intended to remain for the season in her luxurious rooms overlooking
the lake. And yet she had left at a single day’s notice, which involved
her in the useless payment of a week’s rent. Only Jules Vibart, the
lover of the maid, had any suggestion to offer. He connected the sudden
departure with the visit to the hotel a day or two before of a tall,
dark, bearded man. “_Un sauvage—un veritable sauvage!_” cried Jules
Vibart. The man had rooms somewhere in the town. He had been seen
talking earnestly to Madame on the promenade by the lake. Then he had
called. She had refused to see him. He was English, but of his name
there was no record. Madame had left the place immediately afterwards.
Jules Vibart, and, what was of more importance, Jules Vibart’s
sweetheart, thought that this call and the departure were cause and
effect. Only one thing Jules would not discuss. That was the reason why
Marie had left her mistress. Of that he could or would say nothing. If
I wished to know, I must go to Montpellier and ask her.

So ended the first chapter of my inquiry. The second was devoted to the
place which Lady Frances Carfax had sought when she left Lausanne.
Concerning this there had been some secrecy, which confirmed the idea
that she had gone with the intention of throwing someone off her track.
Otherwise why should not her luggage have been openly labelled for
Baden? Both she and it reached the Rhenish spa by some circuitous
route. This much I gathered from the manager of Cook’s local office. So
to Baden I went, after dispatching to Holmes an account of all my
proceedings and receiving in reply a telegram of half-humorous
commendation.

At Baden the track was not difficult to follow. Lady Frances had stayed
at the Englischer Hof for a fortnight. While there she had made the
acquaintance of a Dr. Shlessinger and his wife, a missionary from South
America. Like most lonely ladies, Lady Frances found her comfort and
occupation in religion. Dr. Shlessinger’s remarkable personality, his
whole hearted devotion, and the fact that he was recovering from a
disease contracted in the exercise of his apostolic duties affected her
deeply. She had helped Mrs. Shlessinger in the nursing of the
convalescent saint. He spent his day, as the manager described it to
me, upon a lounge-chair on the veranda, with an attendant lady upon
either side of him. He was preparing a map of the Holy Land, with
special reference to the kingdom of the Midianites, upon which he was
writing a monograph. Finally, having improved much in health, he and
his wife had returned to London, and Lady Frances had started thither
in their company. This was just three weeks before, and the manager had
heard nothing since. As to the maid, Marie, she had gone off some days
beforehand in floods of tears, after informing the other maids that she
was leaving service forever. Dr. Shlessinger had paid the bill of the
whole party before his departure.

“By the way,” said the landlord in conclusion, “you are not the only
friend of Lady Frances Carfax who is inquiring after her just now. Only
a week or so ago we had a man here upon the same errand.”

“Did he give a name?” I asked.

“None; but he was an Englishman, though of an unusual type.”

“A savage?” said I, linking my facts after the fashion of my
illustrious friend.

“Exactly. That describes him very well. He is a bulky, bearded,
sunburned fellow, who looks as if he would be more at home in a
farmers’ inn than in a fashionable hotel. A hard, fierce man, I should
think, and one whom I should be sorry to offend.”

Already the mystery began to define itself, as figures grow clearer
with the lifting of a fog. Here was this good and pious lady pursued
from place to place by a sinister and unrelenting figure. She feared
him, or she would not have fled from Lausanne. He had still followed.
Sooner or later he would overtake her. Had he already overtaken her?
Was _that_ the secret of her continued silence? Could the good people
who were her companions not screen her from his violence or his
blackmail? What horrible purpose, what deep design, lay behind this
long pursuit? There was the problem which I had to solve.

To Holmes I wrote showing how rapidly and surely I had got down to the
roots of the matter. In reply I had a telegram asking for a description
of Dr. Shlessinger’s left ear. Holmes’s ideas of humour are strange and
occasionally offensive, so I took no notice of his ill-timed
jest—indeed, I had already reached Montpellier in my pursuit of the
maid, Marie, before his message came.

I had no difficulty in finding the ex-servant and in learning all that
she could tell me. She was a devoted creature, who had only left her
mistress because she was sure that she was in good hands, and because
her own approaching marriage made a separation inevitable in any case.
Her mistress had, as she confessed with distress, shown some
irritability of temper towards her during their stay in Baden, and had
even questioned her once as if she had suspicions of her honesty, and
this had made the parting easier than it would otherwise have been.
Lady Frances had given her fifty pounds as a wedding-present. Like me,
Marie viewed with deep distrust the stranger who had driven her
mistress from Lausanne. With her own eyes she had seen him seize the
lady’s wrist with great violence on the public promenade by the lake.
He was a fierce and terrible man. She believed that it was out of dread
of him that Lady Frances had accepted the escort of the Shlessingers to
London. She had never spoken to Marie about it, but many little signs
had convinced the maid that her mistress lived in a state of continual
nervous apprehension. So far she had got in her narrative, when
suddenly she sprang from her chair and her face was convulsed with
surprise and fear. “See!” she cried. “The miscreant follows still!
There is the very man of whom I speak.”

Through the open sitting-room window I saw a huge, swarthy man with a
bristling black beard walking slowly down the centre of the street and
staring eagerly at the numbers of the houses. It was clear that, like
myself, he was on the track of the maid. Acting upon the impulse of the
moment, I rushed out and accosted him.

“You are an Englishman,” I said.

“What if I am?” he asked with a most villainous scowl.

“May I ask what your name is?”

“No, you may not,” said he with decision.

The situation was awkward, but the most direct way is often the best.

“Where is the Lady Frances Carfax?” I asked.

He stared at me with amazement.

“What have you done with her? Why have you pursued her? I insist upon
an answer!” said I.

The fellow gave a bellow of anger and sprang upon me like a tiger. I
have held my own in many a struggle, but the man had a grip of iron and
the fury of a fiend. His hand was on my throat and my senses were
nearly gone before an unshaven French _ouvrier_ in a blue blouse darted
out from a _cabaret_ opposite, with a cudgel in his hand, and struck my
assailant a sharp crack over the forearm, which made him leave go his
hold. He stood for an instant fuming with rage and uncertain whether he
should not renew his attack. Then, with a snarl of anger, he left me
and entered the cottage from which I had just come. I turned to thank
my preserver, who stood beside me in the roadway.

“Well, Watson,” said he, “a very pretty hash you have made of it! I
rather think you had better come back with me to London by the night
express.”

An hour afterwards, Sherlock Holmes, in his usual garb and style, was
seated in my private room at the hotel. His explanation of his sudden
and opportune appearance was simplicity itself, for, finding that he
could get away from London, he determined to head me off at the next
obvious point of my travels. In the disguise of a workingman he had sat
in the _cabaret_ waiting for my appearance.

“And a singularly consistent investigation you have made, my dear
Watson,” said he. “I cannot at the moment recall any possible blunder
which you have omitted. The total effect of your proceeding has been to
give the alarm everywhere and yet to discover nothing.”

“Perhaps you would have done no better,” I answered bitterly.

“There is no ‘perhaps’ about it. I _have_ done better. Here is the Hon.
Philip Green, who is a fellow-lodger with you in this hotel, and we may
find him the starting-point for a more successful investigation.”

A card had come up on a salver, and it was followed by the same bearded
ruffian who had attacked me in the street. He started when he saw me.

“What is this, Mr. Holmes?” he asked. “I had your note and I have come.
But what has this man to do with the matter?”

“This is my old friend and associate, Dr. Watson, who is helping us in
this affair.”

The stranger held out a huge, sunburned hand, with a few words of
apology.

“I hope I didn’t harm you. When you accused me of hurting her I lost my
grip of myself. Indeed, I’m not responsible in these days. My nerves
are like live wires. But this situation is beyond me. What I want to
know, in the first place, Mr. Holmes, is, how in the world you came to
hear of my existence at all.”

“I am in touch with Miss Dobney, Lady Frances’s governess.”

“Old Susan Dobney with the mob cap! I remember her well.”

“And she remembers you. It was in the days before—before you found it
better to go to South Africa.”

“Ah, I see you know my whole story. I need hide nothing from you. I
swear to you, Mr. Holmes, that there never was in this world a man who
loved a woman with a more wholehearted love than I had for Frances. I
was a wild youngster, I know—not worse than others of my class. But her
mind was pure as snow. She could not bear a shadow of coarseness. So,
when she came to hear of things that I had done, she would have no more
to say to me. And yet she loved me—that is the wonder of it!—loved me
well enough to remain single all her sainted days just for my sake
alone. When the years had passed and I had made my money at Barberton I
thought perhaps I could seek her out and soften her. I had heard that
she was still unmarried, I found her at Lausanne and tried all I knew.
She weakened, I think, but her will was strong, and when next I called
she had left the town. I traced her to Baden, and then after a time
heard that her maid was here. I’m a rough fellow, fresh from a rough
life, and when Dr. Watson spoke to me as he did I lost hold of myself
for a moment. But for God’s sake tell me what has become of the Lady
Frances.”

“That is for us to find out,” said Sherlock Holmes with peculiar
gravity. “What is your London address, Mr. Green?”

“The Langham Hotel will find me.”

“Then may I recommend that you return there and be on hand in case I
should want you? I have no desire to encourage false hopes, but you may
rest assured that all that can be done will be done for the safety of
Lady Frances. I can say no more for the instant. I will leave you this
card so that you may be able to keep in touch with us. Now, Watson, if
you will pack your bag I will cable to Mrs. Hudson to make one of her
best efforts for two hungry travellers at 7:30 to-morrow.”

A telegram was awaiting us when we reached our Baker Street rooms,
which Holmes read with an exclamation of interest and threw across to
me. “Jagged or torn,” was the message, and the place of origin, Baden.

“What is this?” I asked.

“It is everything,” Holmes answered. “You may remember my seemingly
irrelevant question as to this clerical gentleman’s left ear. You did
not answer it.”

“I had left Baden and could not inquire.”

“Exactly. For this reason I sent a duplicate to the manager of the
Englischer Hof, whose answer lies here.”

“What does it show?”

“It shows, my dear Watson, that we are dealing with an exceptionally
astute and dangerous man. The Rev. Dr. Shlessinger, missionary from
South America, is none other than Holy Peters, one of the most
unscrupulous rascals that Australia has ever evolved—and for a young
country it has turned out some very finished types. His particular
specialty is the beguiling of lonely ladies by playing upon their
religious feelings, and his so-called wife, an Englishwoman named
Fraser, is a worthy helpmate. The nature of his tactics suggested his
identity to me, and this physical peculiarity—he was badly bitten in a
saloon-fight at Adelaide in ’89—confirmed my suspicion. This poor lady
is in the hands of a most infernal couple, who will stick at nothing,
Watson. That she is already dead is a very likely supposition. If not,
she is undoubtedly in some sort of confinement and unable to write to
Miss Dobney or her other friends. It is always possible that she never
reached London, or that she has passed through it, but the former is
improbable, as, with their system of registration, it is not easy for
foreigners to play tricks with the Continental police; and the latter
is also unlikely, as these rogues could not hope to find any other
place where it would be as easy to keep a person under restraint. All
my instincts tell me that she is in London, but as we have at present
no possible means of telling where, we can only take the obvious steps,
eat our dinner, and possess our souls in patience. Later in the evening
I will stroll down and have a word with friend Lestrade at Scotland
Yard.”

But neither the official police nor Holmes’s own small but very
efficient organisation sufficed to clear away the mystery. Amid the
crowded millions of London the three persons we sought were as
completely obliterated as if they had never lived. Advertisements were
tried, and failed. Clues were followed, and led to nothing. Every
criminal resort which Shlessinger might frequent was drawn in vain. His
old associates were watched, but they kept clear of him. And then
suddenly, after a week of helpless suspense there came a flash of
light. A silver-and-brilliant pendant of old Spanish design had been
pawned at Bovington’s, in Westminster Road. The pawner was a large,
clean-shaven man of clerical appearance. His name and address were
demonstrably false. The ear had escaped notice, but the description was
surely that of Shlessinger.

Three times had our bearded friend from the Langham called for news—the
third time within an hour of this fresh development. His clothes were
getting looser on his great body. He seemed to be wilting away in his
anxiety. “If you will only give me something to do!” was his constant
wail. At last Holmes could oblige him.

“He has begun to pawn the jewels. We should get him now.”

“But does this mean that any harm has befallen the Lady Frances?”

Holmes shook his head very gravely.

“Supposing that they have held her prisoner up to now, it is clear that
they cannot let her loose without their own destruction. We must
prepare for the worst.”

“What can I do?”

“These people do not know you by sight?”

“No.”

“It is possible that he will go to some other pawnbroker in the future.
In that case, we must begin again. On the other hand, he has had a fair
price and no questions asked, so if he is in need of ready-money he
will probably come back to Bovington’s. I will give you a note to them,
and they will let you wait in the shop. If the fellow comes you will
follow him home. But no indiscretion, and, above all, no violence. I
put you on your honour that you will take no step without my knowledge
and consent.”

For two days the Hon. Philip Green (he was, I may mention, the son of
the famous admiral of that name who commanded the Sea of Azof fleet in
the Crimean War) brought us no news. On the evening of the third he
rushed into our sitting-room, pale, trembling, with every muscle of his
powerful frame quivering with excitement.

“We have him! We have him!” he cried.

He was incoherent in his agitation. Holmes soothed him with a few words
and thrust him into an armchair.

“Come, now, give us the order of events,” said he.

“She came only an hour ago. It was the wife, this time, but the pendant
she brought was the fellow of the other. She is a tall, pale woman,
with ferret eyes.”

“That is the lady,” said Holmes.

“She left the office and I followed her. She walked up the Kennington
Road, and I kept behind her. Presently she went into a shop. Mr.
Holmes, it was an undertaker’s.”

My companion started. “Well?” he asked in that vibrant voice which told
of the fiery soul behind the cold grey face.

“She was talking to the woman behind the counter. I entered as well.
‘It is late,’ I heard her say, or words to that effect. The woman was
excusing herself. ‘It should be there before now,’ she answered. ‘It
took longer, being out of the ordinary.’ They both stopped and looked
at me, so I asked some questions and then left the shop.”

“You did excellently well. What happened next?”

“The woman came out, but I had hid myself in a doorway. Her suspicions
had been aroused, I think, for she looked round her. Then she called a
cab and got in. I was lucky enough to get another and so to follow her.
She got down at last at No. 36, Poultney Square, Brixton. I drove past,
left my cab at the corner of the square, and watched the house.”

“Did you see anyone?”

“The windows were all in darkness save one on the lower floor. The
blind was down, and I could not see in. I was standing there, wondering
what I should do next, when a covered van drove up with two men in it.
They descended, took something out of the van, and carried it up the
steps to the hall door. Mr. Holmes, it was a coffin.”

“Ah!”

“For an instant I was on the point of rushing in. The door had been
opened to admit the men and their burden. It was the woman who had
opened it. But as I stood there she caught a glimpse of me, and I think
that she recognised me. I saw her start, and she hastily closed the
door. I remembered my promise to you, and here I am.”

“You have done excellent work,” said Holmes, scribbling a few words
upon a half-sheet of paper. “We can do nothing legal without a warrant,
and you can serve the cause best by taking this note down to the
authorities and getting one. There may be some difficulty, but I should
think that the sale of the jewellery should be sufficient. Lestrade
will see to all details.”

“But they may murder her in the meanwhile. What could the coffin mean,
and for whom could it be but for her?”

“We will do all that can be done, Mr. Green. Not a moment will be lost.
Leave it in our hands. Now, Watson,” he added as our client hurried
away, “he will set the regular forces on the move. We are, as usual,
the irregulars, and we must take our own line of action. The situation
strikes me as so desperate that the most extreme measures are
justified. Not a moment is to be lost in getting to Poultney Square.

“Let us try to reconstruct the situation,” said he as we drove swiftly
past the Houses of Parliament and over Westminster Bridge. “These
villains have coaxed this unhappy lady to London, after first
alienating her from her faithful maid. If she has written any letters
they have been intercepted. Through some confederate they have engaged
a furnished house. Once inside it, they have made her a prisoner, and
they have become possessed of the valuable jewellery which has been
their object from the first. Already they have begun to sell part of
it, which seems safe enough to them, since they have no reason to think
that anyone is interested in the lady’s fate. When she is released she
will, of course, denounce them. Therefore, she must not be released.
But they cannot keep her under lock and key forever. So murder is their
only solution.”

“That seems very clear.”

“Now we will take another line of reasoning. When you follow two
separate chains of thought, Watson, you will find some point of
intersection which should approximate to the truth. We will start now,
not from the lady but from the coffin and argue backward. That incident
proves, I fear, beyond all doubt that the lady is dead. It points also
to an orthodox burial with proper accompaniment of medical certificate
and official sanction. Had the lady been obviously murdered, they would
have buried her in a hole in the back garden. But here all is open and
regular. What does this mean? Surely that they have done her to death
in some way which has deceived the doctor and simulated a natural
end—poisoning, perhaps. And yet how strange that they should ever let a
doctor approach her unless he were a confederate, which is hardly a
credible proposition.”

“Could they have forged a medical certificate?”

“Dangerous, Watson, very dangerous. No, I hardly see them doing that.
Pull up, cabby! This is evidently the undertaker’s, for we have just
passed the pawnbroker’s. Would you go in, Watson? Your appearance
inspires confidence. Ask what hour the Poultney Square funeral takes
place to-morrow.”

The woman in the shop answered me without hesitation that it was to be
at eight o’clock in the morning. “You see, Watson, no mystery;
everything above-board! In some way the legal forms have undoubtedly
been complied with, and they think that they have little to fear. Well,
there’s nothing for it now but a direct frontal attack. Are you armed?”

“My stick!”

“Well, well, we shall be strong enough. ‘Thrice is he armed who hath
his quarrel just.’ We simply can’t afford to wait for the police or to
keep within the four corners of the law. You can drive off, cabby. Now,
Watson, we’ll just take our luck together, as we have occasionally in
the past.”

He had rung loudly at the door of a great dark house in the centre of
Poultney Square. It was opened immediately, and the figure of a tall
woman was outlined against the dim-lit hall.

“Well, what do you want?” she asked sharply, peering at us through the
darkness.

“I want to speak to Dr. Shlessinger,” said Holmes.

“There is no such person here,” she answered, and tried to close the
door, but Holmes had jammed it with his foot.

“Well, I want to see the man who lives here, whatever he may call
himself,” said Holmes firmly.

She hesitated. Then she threw open the door. “Well, come in!” said she.
“My husband is not afraid to face any man in the world.” She closed the
door behind us and showed us into a sitting-room on the right side of
the hall, turning up the gas as she left us. “Mr. Peters will be with
you in an instant,” she said.

Her words were literally true, for we had hardly time to look around
the dusty and moth-eaten apartment in which we found ourselves before
the door opened and a big, clean-shaven bald-headed man stepped lightly
into the room. He had a large red face, with pendulous cheeks, and a
general air of superficial benevolence which was marred by a cruel,
vicious mouth.

“There is surely some mistake here, gentlemen,” he said in an unctuous,
make-everything-easy voice. “I fancy that you have been misdirected.
Possibly if you tried farther down the street—”

“That will do; we have no time to waste,” said my companion firmly.
“You are Henry Peters, of Adelaide, late the Rev. Dr. Shlessinger, of
Baden and South America. I am as sure of that as that my own name is
Sherlock Holmes.”

Peters, as I will now call him, started and stared hard at his
formidable pursuer. “I guess your name does not frighten me, Mr.
Holmes,” said he coolly. “When a man’s conscience is easy you can’t
rattle him. What is your business in my house?”

“I want to know what you have done with the Lady Frances Carfax, whom
you brought away with you from Baden.”

“I’d be very glad if you could tell me where that lady may be,” Peters
answered coolly. “I’ve a bill against her for nearly a hundred pounds,
and nothing to show for it but a couple of trumpery pendants that the
dealer would hardly look at. She attached herself to Mrs. Peters and me
at Baden—it is a fact that I was using another name at the time—and she
stuck on to us until we came to London. I paid her bill and her ticket.
Once in London, she gave us the slip, and, as I say, left these
out-of-date jewels to pay her bills. You find her, Mr. Holmes, and I’m
your debtor.”

“I _mean_ to find her,” said Sherlock Holmes. “I’m going through this
house till I do find her.”

“Where is your warrant?”

Holmes half drew a revolver from his pocket. “This will have to serve
till a better one comes.”

“Why, you’re a common burglar.”

“So you might describe me,” said Holmes cheerfully. “My companion is
also a dangerous ruffian. And together we are going through your
house.”

Our opponent opened the door.

“Fetch a policeman, Annie!” said he. There was a whisk of feminine
skirts down the passage, and the hall door was opened and shut.

“Our time is limited, Watson,” said Holmes. “If you try to stop us,
Peters, you will most certainly get hurt. Where is that coffin which
was brought into your house?”

“What do you want with the coffin? It is in use. There is a body in
it.”

“I must see the body.”

“Never with my consent.”

“Then without it.” With a quick movement Holmes pushed the fellow to
one side and passed into the hall. A door half opened stood immediately
before us. We entered. It was the dining-room. On the table, under a
half-lit chandelier, the coffin was lying. Holmes turned up the gas and
raised the lid. Deep down in the recesses of the coffin lay an
emaciated figure. The glare from the lights above beat down upon an
aged and withered face. By no possible process of cruelty, starvation,
or disease could this worn-out wreck be the still beautiful Lady
Frances. Holmes’s face showed his amazement, and also his relief.

“Thank God!” he muttered. “It’s someone else.”

“Ah, you’ve blundered badly for once, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said
Peters, who had followed us into the room.

“Who is the dead woman?”

“Well, if you really must know, she is an old nurse of my wife’s, Rose
Spender by name, whom we found in the Brixton Workhouse Infirmary. We
brought her round here, called in Dr. Horsom, of 13, Firbank
Villas—mind you take the address, Mr. Holmes—and had her carefully
tended, as Christian folk should. On the third day she died—certificate
says senile decay—but that’s only the doctor’s opinion, and of course
you know better. We ordered her funeral to be carried out by Stimson
and Co., of the Kennington Road, who will bury her at eight o’clock
to-morrow morning. Can you pick any hole in that, Mr. Holmes? You’ve
made a silly blunder, and you may as well own up to it. I’d give
something for a photograph of your gaping, staring face when you pulled
aside that lid expecting to see the Lady Frances Carfax and only found
a poor old woman of ninety.”

Holmes’s expression was as impassive as ever under the jeers of his
antagonist, but his clenched hands betrayed his acute annoyance.

“I am going through your house,” said he.

“Are you, though!” cried Peters as a woman’s voice and heavy steps
sounded in the passage. “We’ll soon see about that. This way, officers,
if you please. These men have forced their way into my house, and I
cannot get rid of them. Help me to put them out.”

A sergeant and a constable stood in the doorway. Holmes drew his card
from his case.

“This is my name and address. This is my friend, Dr. Watson.”

“Bless you, sir, we know you very well,” said the sergeant, “but you
can’t stay here without a warrant.”

“Of course not. I quite understand that.”

“Arrest him!” cried Peters.

“We know where to lay our hands on this gentleman if he is wanted,”
said the sergeant majestically, “but you’ll have to go, Mr. Holmes.”

“Yes, Watson, we shall have to go.”

A minute later we were in the street once more. Holmes was as cool as
ever, but I was hot with anger and humiliation. The sergeant had
followed us.

“Sorry, Mr. Holmes, but that’s the law.”

“Exactly, Sergeant, you could not do otherwise.”

“I expect there was good reason for your presence there. If there is
anything I can do—”

“It’s a missing lady, Sergeant, and we think she is in that house. I
expect a warrant presently.”

“Then I’ll keep my eye on the parties, Mr. Holmes. If anything comes
along, I will surely let you know.”

It was only nine o’clock, and we were off full cry upon the trail at
once. First we drove to Brixton Workhouse Infirmary, where we found
that it was indeed the truth that a charitable couple had called some
days before, that they had claimed an imbecile old woman as a former
servant, and that they had obtained permission to take her away with
them. No surprise was expressed at the news that she had since died.

The doctor was our next goal. He had been called in, had found the
woman dying of pure senility, had actually seen her pass away, and had
signed the certificate in due form. “I assure you that everything was
perfectly normal and there was no room for foul play in the matter,”
said he. Nothing in the house had struck him as suspicious save that
for people of their class it was remarkable that they should have no
servant. So far and no further went the doctor.

Finally we found our way to Scotland Yard. There had been difficulties
of procedure in regard to the warrant. Some delay was inevitable. The
magistrate’s signature might not be obtained until next morning. If
Holmes would call about nine he could go down with Lestrade and see it
acted upon. So ended the day, save that near midnight our friend, the
sergeant, called to say that he had seen flickering lights here and
there in the windows of the great dark house, but that no one had left
it and none had entered. We could but pray for patience and wait for
the morrow.

Sherlock Holmes was too irritable for conversation and too restless for
sleep. I left him smoking hard, with his heavy, dark brows knotted
together, and his long, nervous fingers tapping upon the arms of his
chair, as he turned over in his mind every possible solution of the
mystery. Several times in the course of the night I heard him prowling
about the house. Finally, just after I had been called in the morning,
he rushed into my room. He was in his dressing-gown, but his pale,
hollow-eyed face told me that his night had been a sleepless one.

“What time was the funeral? Eight, was it not?” he asked eagerly.
“Well, it is 7:20 now. Good heavens, Watson, what has become of any
brains that God has given me? Quick, man, quick! It’s life or death—a
hundred chances on death to one on life. I’ll never forgive myself,
never, if we are too late!”

Five minutes had not passed before we were flying in a hansom down
Baker Street. But even so it was twenty-five to eight as we passed Big
Ben, and eight struck as we tore down the Brixton Road. But others were
late as well as we. Ten minutes after the hour the hearse was still
standing at the door of the house, and even as our foaming horse came
to a halt the coffin, supported by three men, appeared on the
threshold. Holmes darted forward and barred their way.

“Take it back!” he cried, laying his hand on the breast of the
foremost. “Take it back this instant!”

“What the devil do you mean? Once again I ask you, where is your
warrant?” shouted the furious Peters, his big red face glaring over the
farther end of the coffin.

“The warrant is on its way. The coffin shall remain in the house until
it comes.”

The authority in Holmes’s voice had its effect upon the bearers. Peters
had suddenly vanished into the house, and they obeyed these new orders.
“Quick, Watson, quick! Here is a screw-driver!” he shouted as the
coffin was replaced upon the table. “Here’s one for you, my man! A
sovereign if the lid comes off in a minute! Ask no questions—work away!
That’s good! Another! And another! Now pull all together! It’s giving!
It’s giving! Ah, that does it at last.”

With a united effort we tore off the coffin-lid. As we did so there
came from the inside a stupefying and overpowering smell of chloroform.
A body lay within, its head all wreathed in cotton-wool, which had been
soaked in the narcotic. Holmes plucked it off and disclosed the
statuesque face of a handsome and spiritual woman of middle age. In an
instant he had passed his arm round the figure and raised her to a
sitting position.

“Is she gone, Watson? Is there a spark left? Surely we are not too
late!”

For half an hour it seemed that we were. What with actual suffocation,
and what with the poisonous fumes of the chloroform, the Lady Frances
seemed to have passed the last point of recall. And then, at last, with
artificial respiration, with injected ether, and with every device that
science could suggest, some flutter of life, some quiver of the
eyelids, some dimming of a mirror, spoke of the slowly returning life.
A cab had driven up, and Holmes, parting the blind, looked out at it.
“Here is Lestrade with his warrant,” said he. “He will find that his
birds have flown. And here,” he added as a heavy step hurried along the
passage, “is someone who has a better right to nurse this lady than we
have. Good morning, Mr. Green; I think that the sooner we can move the
Lady Frances the better. Meanwhile, the funeral may proceed, and the
poor old woman who still lies in that coffin may go to her last
resting-place alone.”

“Should you care to add the case to your annals, my dear Watson,” said
Holmes that evening, “it can only be as an example of that temporary
eclipse to which even the best-balanced mind may be exposed. Such slips
are common to all mortals, and the greatest is he who can recognise and
repair them. To this modified credit I may, perhaps, make some claim.
My night was haunted by the thought that somewhere a clue, a strange
sentence, a curious observation, had come under my notice and had been
too easily dismissed. Then, suddenly, in the grey of the morning, the
words came back to me. It was the remark of the undertaker’s wife, as
reported by Philip Green. She had said, ‘It should be there before now.
It took longer, being out of the ordinary.’ It was the coffin of which
she spoke. It had been out of the ordinary. That could only mean that
it had been made to some special measurement. But why? Why? Then in an
instant I remembered the deep sides, and the little wasted figure at
the bottom. Why so large a coffin for so small a body? To leave room
for another body. Both would be buried under the one certificate. It
had all been so clear, if only my own sight had not been dimmed. At
eight the Lady Frances would be buried. Our one chance was to stop the
coffin before it left the house.

“It was a desperate chance that we might find her alive, but it _was_ a
chance, as the result showed. These people had never, to my knowledge,
done a murder. They might shrink from actual violence at the last. They
could bury her with no sign of how she met her end, and even if she
were exhumed there was a chance for them. I hoped that such
considerations might prevail with them. You can reconstruct the scene
well enough. You saw the horrible den upstairs, where the poor lady had
been kept so long. They rushed in and overpowered her with their
chloroform, carried her down, poured more into the coffin to insure
against her waking, and then screwed down the lid. A clever device,
Watson. It is new to me in the annals of crime. If our ex-missionary
friends escape the clutches of Lestrade, I shall expect to hear of some
brilliant incidents in their future career.”




The Adventure of the Dying Detective


Mrs. Hudson, the landlady of Sherlock Holmes, was a long-suffering
woman. Not only was her first-floor flat invaded at all hours by
throngs of singular and often undesirable characters but her remarkable
lodger showed an eccentricity and irregularity in his life which must
have sorely tried her patience. His incredible untidiness, his
addiction to music at strange hours, his occasional revolver practice
within doors, his weird and often malodorous scientific experiments,
and the atmosphere of violence and danger which hung around him made
him the very worst tenant in London. On the other hand, his payments
were princely. I have no doubt that the house might have been purchased
at the price which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I
was with him.

The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared to
interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem. She
was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness and courtesy
in his dealings with women. He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he
was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine was her regard
for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she came to my rooms in
the second year of my married life and told me of the sad condition to
which my poor friend was reduced.

“He’s dying, Dr. Watson,” said she. “For three days he has been
sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day. He would not let me get a
doctor. This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his face and
his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it. ‘With
your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctor this very
hour,’ said I. ‘Let it be Watson, then,’ said he. I wouldn’t waste an
hour in coming to him, sir, or you may not see him alive.”

I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness. I need not say
that I rushed for my coat and my hat. As we drove back I asked for the
details.

“There is little I can tell you, sir. He has been working at a case
down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has brought
this illness back with him. He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoon
and has never moved since. For these three days neither food nor drink
has passed his lips.”

“Good God! Why did you not call in a doctor?”

“He wouldn’t have it, sir. You know how masterful he is. I didn’t dare
to disobey him. But he’s not long for this world, as you’ll see for
yourself the moment that you set eyes on him.”

He was indeed a deplorable spectacle. In the dim light of a foggy
November day the sick room was a gloomy spot, but it was that gaunt,
wasted face staring at me from the bed which sent a chill to my heart.
His eyes had the brightness of fever, there was a hectic flush upon
either cheek, and dark crusts clung to his lips; the thin hands upon
the coverlet twitched incessantly, his voice was croaking and
spasmodic. He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight of me
brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.

“Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days,” said he in a
feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.

“My dear fellow!” I cried, approaching him.

“Stand back! Stand right back!” said he with the sharp imperiousness
which I had associated only with moments of crisis. “If you approach
me, Watson, I shall order you out of the house.”

“But why?”

“Because it is my desire. Is that not enough?”

Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right. He was more masterful than ever. It was
pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.

“I only wished to help,” I explained.

“Exactly! You will help best by doing what you are told.”

“Certainly, Holmes.”

He relaxed the austerity of his manner.

“You are not angry?” he asked, gasping for breath.

Poor devil, how could I be angry when I saw him lying in such a plight
before me?

“It’s for your own sake, Watson,” he croaked.

“For _my_ sake?”

“I know what is the matter with me. It is a coolie disease from
Sumatra—a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though they
have made little of it up to date. One thing only is certain. It is
infallibly deadly, and it is horribly contagious.”

He spoke now with a feverish energy, the long hands twitching and
jerking as he motioned me away.

“Contagious by touch, Watson—that’s it, by touch. Keep your distance
and all is well.”

“Good heavens, Holmes! Do you suppose that such a consideration weighs
with me of an instant? It would not affect me in the case of a
stranger. Do you imagine it would prevent me from doing my duty to so
old a friend?”

Again I advanced, but he repulsed me with a look of furious anger.

“If you will stand there I will talk. If you do not you must leave the
room.”

I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that
I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood
them. But now all my professional instincts were aroused. Let him be my
master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.

“Holmes,” said I, “you are not yourself. A sick man is but a child, and
so I will treat you. Whether you like it or not, I will examine your
symptoms and treat you for them.”

He looked at me with venomous eyes.

“If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least have
someone in whom I have confidence,” said he.

“Then you have none in me?”

“In your friendship, certainly. But facts are facts, Watson, and, after
all, you are only a general practitioner with very limited experience
and mediocre qualifications. It is painful to have to say these things,
but you leave me no choice.”

I was bitterly hurt.

“Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes. It shows me very clearly the
state of your own nerves. But if you have no confidence in me I would
not intrude my services. Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose
Fisher, or any of the best men in London. But someone you _must_ have,
and that is final. If you think that I am going to stand here and see
you die without either helping you myself or bringing anyone else to
help you, then you have mistaken your man.”

“You mean well, Watson,” said the sick man with something between a sob
and a groan. “Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance? What do you know,
pray, of Tapanuli fever? What do you know of the black Formosa
corruption?”

“I have never heard of either.”

“There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological
possibilities, in the East, Watson.” He paused after each sentence to
collect his failing strength. “I have learned so much during some
recent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect. It was in the
course of them that I contracted this complaint. You can do nothing.”

“Possibly not. But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatest
living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London. All
remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetch him.”
I turned resolutely to the door.

Never have I had such a shock! In an instant, with a tiger-spring, the
dying man had intercepted me. I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key.
The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted and panting
after his one tremendous outflame of energy.

“You won’t take the key from me by force, Watson. I’ve got you, my
friend. Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.
But I’ll humour you.” (All this in little gasps, with terrible
struggles for breath between.) “You’ve only my own good at heart. Of
course I know that very well. You shall have your way, but give me time
to get my strength. Not now, Watson, not now. It’s four o’clock. At six
you can go.”

“This is insanity, Holmes.”

“Only two hours, Watson. I promise you will go at six. Are you content
to wait?”

“I seem to have no choice.”

“None in the world, Watson. Thank you, I need no help in arranging the
clothes. You will please keep your distance. Now, Watson, there is one
other condition that I would make. You will seek help, not from the man
you mention, but from the one that I choose.”

“By all means.”

“The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered
this room, Watson. You will find some books over there. I am somewhat
exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pours electricity into
a non-conductor? At six, Watson, we resume our conversation.”

But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and in
circumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that caused by his
spring to the door. I had stood for some minutes looking at the silent
figure in the bed. His face was almost covered by the clothes and he
appeared to be asleep. Then, unable to settle down to reading, I walked
slowly round the room, examining the pictures of celebrated criminals
with which every wall was adorned. Finally, in my aimless
perambulation, I came to the mantelpiece. A litter of pipes,
tobacco-pouches, syringes, penknives, revolver-cartridges, and other
_débris_ was scattered over it. In the midst of these was a small black
and white ivory box with a sliding lid. It was a neat little thing, and
I had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely, when——

It was a dreadful cry that he gave—a yell which might have been heard
down the street. My skin went cold and my hair bristled at that
horrible scream. As I turned I caught a glimpse of a convulsed face and
frantic eyes. I stood paralysed, with the little box in my hand.

“Put it down! Down, this instant, Watson—this instant, I say!” His head
sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as I
replaced the box upon the mantelpiece. “I hate to have my things
touched, Watson. You know that I hate it. You fidget me beyond
endurance. You, a doctor—you are enough to drive a patient into an
asylum. Sit down, man, and let me have my rest!”

The incident left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind. The
violent and causeless excitement, followed by this brutality of speech,
so far removed from his usual suavity, showed me how deep was the
disorganisation of his mind. Of all ruins, that of a noble mind is the
most deplorable. I sat in silent dejection until the stipulated time
had passed. He seemed to have been watching the clock as well as I, for
it was hardly six before he began to talk with the same feverish
animation as before.

“Now, Watson,” said he. “Have you any change in your pocket?”

“Yes.”

“Any silver?”

“A good deal.”

“How many half-crowns?”

“I have five.”

“Ah, too few! Too few! How very unfortunate, Watson! However, such as
they are you can put them in your watchpocket. And all the rest of your
money in your left trouser pocket. Thank you. It will balance you so
much better like that.”

This was raving insanity. He shuddered, and again made a sound between
a cough and a sob.

“You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very careful that
not for one instant shall it be more than half on. I implore you to be
careful, Watson. Thank you, that is excellent. No, you need not draw
the blind. Now you will have the kindness to place some letters and
papers upon this table within my reach. Thank you. Now some of that
litter from the mantelpiece. Excellent, Watson! There is a sugar-tongs
there. Kindly raise that small ivory box with its assistance. Place it
here among the papers. Good! You can now go and fetch Mr. Culverton
Smith, of 13, Lower Burke Street.”

To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat weakened,
for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that it seemed dangerous to
leave him. However, he was as eager now to consult the person named as
he had been obstinate in refusing.

“I never heard the name,” said I.

“Possibly not, my good Watson. It may surprise you to know that the man
upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a medical man, but
a planter. Mr. Culverton Smith is a well-known resident of Sumatra, now
visiting London. An outbreak of the disease upon his plantation, which
was distant from medical aid, caused him to study it himself, with some
rather far-reaching consequences. He is a very methodical person, and I
did not desire you to start before six, because I was well aware that
you would not find him in his study. If you could persuade him to come
here and give us the benefit of his unique experience of this disease,
the investigation of which has been his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt
that he could help me.”

I gave Holmes’s remarks as a consecutive whole and will not attempt to
indicate how they were interrupted by gaspings for breath and those
clutchings of his hands which indicated the pain from which he was
suffering. His appearance had changed for the worse during the few
hours that I had been with him. Those hectic spots were more
pronounced, the eyes shone more brightly out of darker hollows, and a
cold sweat glimmered upon his brow. He still retained, however, the
jaunty gallantry of his speech. To the last gasp he would always be the
master.

“You will tell him exactly how you have left me,” said he. “You will
convey the very impression which is in your own mind—a dying man—a
dying and delirious man. Indeed, I cannot think why the whole bed of
the ocean is not one solid mass of oysters, so prolific the creatures
seem. Ah, I am wandering! Strange how the brain controls the brain!
What was I saying, Watson?”

“My directions for Mr. Culverton Smith.”

“Ah, yes, I remember. My life depends upon it. Plead with him, Watson.
There is no good feeling between us. His nephew, Watson—I had
suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it. The boy died
horribly. He has a grudge against me. You will soften him, Watson. Beg
him, pray him, get him here by any means. He can save me—only he!”

“I will bring him in a cab, if I have to carry him down to it.”

“You will do nothing of the sort. You will persuade him to come. And
then you will return in front of him. Make any excuse so as not to come
with him. Don’t forget, Watson. You won’t fail me. You never did fail
me. No doubt there are natural enemies which limit the increase of the
creatures. You and I, Watson, we have done our part. Shall the world,
then, be overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible! You’ll convey all that
is in your mind.”

I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect babbling
like a foolish child. He had handed me the key, and with a happy
thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in. Mrs. Hudson
was waiting, trembling and weeping, in the passage. Behind me as I
passed from the flat I heard Holmes’s high, thin voice in some
delirious chant. Below, as I stood whistling for a cab, a man came on
me through the fog.

“How is Mr. Holmes, sir?” he asked.

It was an old acquaintance, Inspector Morton, of Scotland Yard, dressed
in unofficial tweeds.

“He is very ill,” I answered.

He looked at me in a most singular fashion. Had it not been too
fiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showed
exultation in his face.

“I heard some rumour of it,” said he.

The cab had driven up, and I left him.

Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in the
vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington. The particular
one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demure
respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its massive
folding-door, and its shining brasswork. All was in keeping with a
solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tinted
electrical light behind him.

“Yes, Mr. Culverton Smith is in. Dr. Watson! Very good, sir, I will
take up your card.”

My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. Culverton Smith.
Through the half-open door I heard a high, petulant, penetrating voice.

“Who is this person? What does he want? Dear me, Staples, how often
have I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours of study?”

There came a gentle flow of soothing explanation from the butler.

“Well, I won’t see him, Staples. I can’t have my work interrupted like
this. I am not at home. Say so. Tell him to come in the morning if he
really must see me.”

Again the gentle murmur.

“Well, well, give him that message. He can come in the morning, or he
can stay away. My work must not be hindered.”

I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and counting the
minutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him. It was not a time to
stand upon ceremony. His life depended upon my promptness. Before the
apologetic butler had delivered his message I had pushed past him and
was in the room.

With a shrill cry of anger a man rose from a reclining chair beside the
fire. I saw a great yellow face, coarse-grained and greasy, with heavy,
double-chin, and two sullen, menacing grey eyes which glared at me from
under tufted and sandy brows. A high bald head had a small velvet
smoking-cap poised coquettishly upon one side of its pink curve. The
skull was of enormous capacity, and yet as I looked down I saw to my
amazement that the figure of the man was small and frail, twisted in
the shoulders and back like one who has suffered from rickets in his
childhood.

“What’s this?” he cried in a high, screaming voice. “What is the
meaning of this intrusion? Didn’t I send you word that I would see you
to-morrow morning?”

“I am sorry,” said I, “but the matter cannot be delayed. Mr. Sherlock
Holmes—”

The mention of my friend’s name had an extraordinary effect upon the
little man. The look of anger passed in an instant from his face. His
features became tense and alert.

“Have you come from Holmes?” he asked.

“I have just left him.”

“What about Holmes? How is he?”

“He is desperately ill. That is why I have come.”

The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his own. As he did
so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over the mantelpiece. I
could have sworn that it was set in a malicious and abominable smile.
Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been some nervous contraction
which I had surprised, for he turned to me an instant later with
genuine concern upon his features.

“I am sorry to hear this,” said he. “I only know Mr. Holmes through
some business dealings which we have had, but I have every respect for
his talents and his character. He is an amateur of crime, as I am of
disease. For him the villain, for me the microbe. There are my
prisons,” he continued, pointing to a row of bottles and jars which
stood upon a side table. “Among those gelatine cultivations some of the
very worst offenders in the world are now doing time.”

“It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes desired to
see you. He has a high opinion of you and thought that you were the one
man in London who could help him.”

The little man started, and the jaunty smoking-cap slid to the floor.

“Why?” he asked. “Why should Mr. Holmes think that I could help him in
his trouble?”

“Because of your knowledge of Eastern diseases.”

“But why should he think that this disease which he has contracted is
Eastern?”

“Because, in some professional inquiry, he has been working among
Chinese sailors down in the docks.”

Mr. Culverton Smith smiled pleasantly and picked up his smoking-cap.

“Oh, that’s it—is it?” said he. “I trust the matter is not so grave as
you suppose. How long has he been ill?”

“About three days.”

“Is he delirious?”

“Occasionally.”

“Tut, tut! This sounds serious. It would be inhuman not to answer his
call. I very much resent any interruption to my work, Dr. Watson, but
this case is certainly exceptional. I will come with you at once.”

I remembered Holmes’s injunction.

“I have another appointment,” said I.

“Very good. I will go alone. I have a note of Mr. Holmes’s address. You
can rely upon my being there within half an hour at most.”

It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes’s bedroom. For all
that I knew the worst might have happened in my absence. To my enormous
relief, he had improved greatly in the interval. His appearance was as
ghastly as ever, but all trace of delirium had left him and he spoke in
a feeble voice, it is true, but with even more than his usual crispness
and lucidity.

“Well, did you see him, Watson?”

“Yes; he is coming.”

“Admirable, Watson! Admirable! You are the best of messengers.”

“He wished to return with me.”

“That would never do, Watson. That would be obviously impossible. Did
he ask what ailed me?”

“I told him about the Chinese in the East End.”

“Exactly! Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend could. You
can now disappear from the scene.”

“I must wait and hear his opinion, Holmes.”

“Of course you must. But I have reasons to suppose that this opinion
would be very much more frank and valuable if he imagines that we are
alone. There is just room behind the head of my bed, Watson.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“I fear there is no alternative, Watson. The room does not lend itself
to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less likely to arouse
suspicion. But just there, Watson, I fancy that it could be done.”
Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon his haggard face.
“There are the wheels, Watson. Quick, man, if you love me! And don’t
budge, whatever happens—whatever happens, do you hear? Don’t speak!
Don’t move! Just listen with all your ears.” Then in an instant his
sudden access of strength departed, and his masterful, purposeful talk
droned away into the low, vague murmurings of a semi-delirious man.

From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled I heard
the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the closing of the
bedroom door. Then, to my surprise, there came a long silence, broken
only by the heavy breathings and gaspings of the sick man. I could
imagine that our visitor was standing by the bedside and looking down
at the sufferer. At last that strange hush was broken.

“Holmes!” he cried. “Holmes!” in the insistent tone of one who awakens
a sleeper. “Can’t you hear me, Holmes?” There was a rustling, as if he
had shaken the sick man roughly by the shoulder.

“Is that you, Mr. Smith?” Holmes whispered. “I hardly dared hope that
you would come.”

The other laughed.

“I should imagine not,” he said. “And yet, you see, I am here. Coals of
fire, Holmes—coals of fire!”

“It is very good of you—very noble of you. I appreciate your special
knowledge.”

Our visitor sniggered.

“You do. You are, fortunately, the only man in London who does. Do you
know what is the matter with you?”

“The same,” said Holmes.

“Ah! You recognise the symptoms?”

“Only too well.”

“Well, I shouldn’t be surprised, Holmes. I shouldn’t be surprised if it
_were_ the same. A bad lookout for you if it is. Poor Victor was a dead
man on the fourth day—a strong, hearty young fellow. It was certainly,
as you said, very surprising that he should have contracted an
out-of-the-way Asiatic disease in the heart of London—a disease, too,
of which I had made such a very special study. Singular coincidence,
Holmes. Very smart of you to notice it, but rather uncharitable to
suggest that it was cause and effect.”

“I knew that you did it.”

“Oh, you did, did you? Well, you couldn’t prove it, anyhow. But what do
you think of yourself spreading reports about me like that, and then
crawling to me for help the moment you are in trouble? What sort of a
game is that—eh?”

I heard the rasping, laboured breathing of the sick man. “Give me the
water!” he gasped.

“You’re precious near your end, my friend, but I don’t want you to go
till I have had a word with you. That’s why I give you water. There,
don’t slop it about! That’s right. Can you understand what I say?”

Holmes groaned.

“Do what you can for me. Let bygones be bygones,” he whispered. “I’ll
put the words out of my head—I swear I will. Only cure me, and I’ll
forget it.”

“Forget what?”

“Well, about Victor Savage’s death. You as good as admitted just now
that you had done it. I’ll forget it.”

“You can forget it or remember it, just as you like. I don’t see you in
the witnessbox. Quite another shaped box, my good Holmes, I assure you.
It matters nothing to me that you should know how my nephew died. It’s
not him we are talking about. It’s you.”

“Yes, yes.”

“The fellow who came for me—I’ve forgotten his name—said that you
contracted it down in the East End among the sailors.”

“I could only account for it so.”

“You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not? Think yourself
smart, don’t you? You came across someone who was smarter this time.
Now cast your mind back, Holmes. Can you think of no other way you
could have got this thing?”

“I can’t think. My mind is gone. For heaven’s sake help me!”

“Yes, I will help you. I’ll help you to understand just where you are
and how you got there. I’d like you to know before you die.”

“Give me something to ease my pain.”

“Painful, is it? Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing towards the
end. Takes you as cramp, I fancy.”

“Yes, yes; it is cramp.”

“Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow. Listen now! Can you remember
any unusual incident in your life just about the time your symptoms
began?”

“No, no; nothing.”

“Think again.”

“I’m too ill to think.”

“Well, then, I’ll help you. Did anything come by post?”

“By post?”

“A box by chance?”

“I’m fainting—I’m gone!”

“Listen, Holmes!” There was a sound as if he was shaking the dying man,
and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet in my hiding-place.
“You must hear me. You _shall_ hear me. Do you remember a box—an ivory
box? It came on Wednesday. You opened it—do you remember?”

“Yes, yes, I opened it. There was a sharp spring inside it. Some joke—”

“It was no joke, as you will find to your cost. You fool, you would
have it and you have got it. Who asked you to cross my path? If you had
left me alone I would not have hurt you.”

“I remember,” Holmes gasped. “The spring! It drew blood. This box—this
on the table.”

“The very one, by George! And it may as well leave the room in my
pocket. There goes your last shred of evidence. But you have the truth
now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge that I killed you. You
knew too much of the fate of Victor Savage, so I have sent you to share
it. You are very near your end, Holmes. I will sit here and I will
watch you die.”

Holmes’s voice had sunk to an almost inaudible whisper.

“What is that?” said Smith. “Turn up the gas? Ah, the shadows begin to
fall, do they? Yes, I will turn it up, that I may see you the better.”
He crossed the room and the light suddenly brightened. “Is there any
other little service that I can do you, my friend?”

“A match and a cigarette.”

I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement. He was speaking in his
natural voice—a little weak, perhaps, but the very voice I knew. There
was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton Smith was standing in
silent amazement looking down at his companion.

“What’s the meaning of this?” I heard him say at last in a dry, rasping
tone.

“The best way of successfully acting a part is to be it,” said Holmes.
“I give you my word that for three days I have tasted neither food nor
drink until you were good enough to pour me out that glass of water.
But it is the tobacco which I find most irksome. Ah, here _are_ some
cigarettes.” I heard the striking of a match. “That is very much
better. Halloa! halloa! Do I hear the step of a friend?”

There were footfalls outside, the door opened, and Inspector Morton
appeared.

“All is in order and this is your man,” said Holmes.

The officer gave the usual cautions.

“I arrest you on the charge of the murder of one Victor Savage,” he
concluded.

“And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock Holmes,”
remarked my friend with a chuckle. “To save an invalid trouble,
Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough to give our signal by
turning up the gas. By the way, the prisoner has a small box in the
right-hand pocket of his coat which it would be as well to remove.
Thank you. I would handle it gingerly if I were you. Put it down here.
It may play its part in the trial.”

There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash of iron
and a cry of pain.

“You’ll only get yourself hurt,” said the inspector. “Stand still, will
you?” There was the click of the closing handcuffs.

“A nice trap!” cried the high, snarling voice. “It will bring _you_
into the dock, Holmes, not me. He asked me to come here to cure him. I
was sorry for him and I came. Now he will pretend, no doubt, that I
have said anything which he may invent which will corroborate his
insane suspicions. You can lie as you like, Holmes. My word is always
as good as yours.”

“Good heavens!” cried Holmes. “I had totally forgotten him. My dear
Watson, I owe you a thousand apologies. To think that I should have
overlooked you! I need not introduce you to Mr. Culverton Smith, since
I understand that you met somewhat earlier in the evening. Have you the
cab below? I will follow you when I am dressed, for I may be of some
use at the station.

“I never needed it more,” said Holmes as he refreshed himself with a
glass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his toilet.
“However, as you know, my habits are irregular, and such a feat means
less to me than to most men. It was very essential that I should
impress Mrs. Hudson with the reality of my condition, since she was to
convey it to you, and you in turn to him. You won’t be offended,
Watson? You will realise that among your many talents dissimulation
finds no place, and that if you had shared my secret you would never
have been able to impress Smith with the urgent necessity of his
presence, which was the vital point of the whole scheme. Knowing his
vindictive nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to look
upon his handiwork.”

“But your appearance, Holmes—your ghastly face?”

“Three days of absolute fast does not improve one’s beauty, Watson. For
the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure. With vaseline
upon one’s forehead, belladonna in one’s eyes, rouge over the
cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round one’s lips, a very satisfying
effect can be produced. Malingering is a subject upon which I have
sometimes thought of writing a monograph. A little occasional talk
about half-crowns, oysters, or any other extraneous subject produces a
pleasing effect of delirium.”

“But why would you not let me near you, since there was in truth no
infection?”

“Can you ask, my dear Watson? Do you imagine that I have no respect for
your medical talents? Could I fancy that your astute judgment would
pass a dying man who, however weak, had no rise of pulse or
temperature? At four yards, I could deceive you. If I failed to do so,
who would bring my Smith within my grasp? No, Watson, I would not touch
that box. You can just see if you look at it sideways where the sharp
spring like a viper’s tooth emerges as you open it. I dare say it was
by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between this monster
and a reversion, was done to death. My correspondence, however, is, as
you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon my guard against any
packages which reach me. It was clear to me, however, that by
pretending that he had really succeeded in his design I might surprise
a confession. That pretence I have carried out with the thoroughness of
the true artist. Thank you, Watson, you must help me on with my coat.
When we have finished at the police-station I think that something
nutritious at Simpson’s would not be out of place.”




His Last Bow: The War Service of Sherlock Holmes


It was nine o’clock at night upon the second of August—the most
terrible August in the history of the world. One might have thought
already that God’s curse hung heavy over a degenerate world, for there
was an awesome hush and a feeling of vague expectancy in the sultry and
stagnant air. The sun had long set, but one blood-red gash like an open
wound lay low in the distant west. Above, the stars were shining
brightly, and below, the lights of the shipping glimmered in the bay.
The two famous Germans stood beside the stone parapet of the garden
walk, with the long, low, heavily gabled house behind them, and they
looked down upon the broad sweep of the beach at the foot of the great
chalk cliff in which Von Bork, like some wandering eagle, had perched
himself four years before. They stood with their heads close together,
talking in low, confidential tones. From below the two glowing ends of
their cigars might have been the smouldering eyes of some malignant
fiend looking down in the darkness.

A remarkable man this Von Bork—a man who could hardly be matched among
all the devoted agents of the Kaiser. It was his talents which had
first recommended him for the English mission, the most important
mission of all, but since he had taken it over those talents had become
more and more manifest to the half-dozen people in the world who were
really in touch with the truth. One of these was his present companion,
Baron Von Herling, the chief secretary of the legation, whose huge
100-horse-power Benz car was blocking the country lane as it waited to
waft its owner back to London.

“So far as I can judge the trend of events, you will probably be back
in Berlin within the week,” the secretary was saying. “When you get
there, my dear Von Bork, I think you will be surprised at the welcome
you will receive. I happen to know what is thought in the highest
quarters of your work in this country.” He was a huge man, the
secretary, deep, broad, and tall, with a slow, heavy fashion of speech
which had been his main asset in his political career.

Von Bork laughed.

“They are not very hard to deceive,” he remarked. “A more docile,
simple folk could not be imagined.”

“I don’t know about that,” said the other thoughtfully. “They have
strange limits and one must learn to observe them. It is that surface
simplicity of theirs which makes a trap for the stranger. One’s first
impression is that they are entirely soft. Then one comes suddenly upon
something very hard, and you know that you have reached the limit and
must adapt yourself to the fact. They have, for example, their insular
conventions which simply _must_ be observed.”

“Meaning ‘good form’ and that sort of thing?” Von Bork sighed as one
who had suffered much.

“Meaning British prejudice in all its queer manifestations. As an
example I may quote one of my own worst blunders—I can afford to talk
of my blunders, for you know my work well enough to be aware of my
successes. It was on my first arrival. I was invited to a week-end
gathering at the country house of a cabinet minister. The conversation
was amazingly indiscreet.”

Von Bork nodded. “I’ve been there,” said he dryly.

“Exactly. Well, I naturally sent a résumé of the information to Berlin.
Unfortunately our good chancellor is a little heavy-handed in these
matters, and he transmitted a remark which showed that he was aware of
what had been said. This, of course, took the trail straight up to me.
You’ve no idea the harm that it did me. There was nothing soft about
our British hosts on that occasion, I can assure you. I was two years
living it down. Now you, with this sporting pose of yours—”

“No, no, don’t call it a pose. A pose is an artificial thing. This is
quite natural. I am a born sportsman. I enjoy it.”

“Well, that makes it the more effective. You yacht against them, you
hunt with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, your
four-in-hand takes the prize at Olympia. I have even heard that you go
the length of boxing with the young officers. What is the result?
Nobody takes you seriously. You are a ‘good old sport’ ‘quite a decent
fellow for a German,’ a hard-drinking, night-club, knock-about-town,
devil-may-care young fellow. And all the time this quiet country house
of yours is the centre of half the mischief in England, and the
sporting squire the most astute secret-service man in Europe. Genius,
my dear Von Bork—genius!”

“You flatter me, Baron. But certainly I may claim my four years in this
country have not been unproductive. I’ve never shown you my little
store. Would you mind stepping in for a moment?”

The door of the study opened straight on to the terrace. Von Bork
pushed it back, and, leading the way, he clicked the switch of the
electric light. He then closed the door behind the bulky form which
followed him and carefully adjusted the heavy curtain over the latticed
window. Only when all these precautions had been taken and tested did
he turn his sunburned aquiline face to his guest.

“Some of my papers have gone,” said he. “When my wife and the household
left yesterday for Flushing they took the less important with them. I
must, of course, claim the protection of the embassy for the others.”

“Your name has already been filed as one of the personal suite. There
will be no difficulties for you or your baggage. Of course, it is just
possible that we may not have to go. England may leave France to her
fate. We are sure that there is no binding treaty between them.”

“And Belgium?”

“Yes, and Belgium, too.”

Von Bork shook his head. “I don’t see how that could be. There is a
definite treaty there. She could never recover from such a
humiliation.”

“She would at least have peace for the moment.”

“But her honour?”

“Tut, my dear sir, we live in a utilitarian age. Honour is a mediæval
conception. Besides England is not ready. It is an inconceivable thing,
but even our special war tax of fifty million, which one would think
made our purpose as clear as if we had advertised it on the front page
of the _Times_, has not roused these people from their slumbers. Here
and there one hears a question. It is my business to find an answer.
Here and there also there is an irritation. It is my business to soothe
it. But I can assure you that so far as the essentials go—the storage
of munitions, the preparation for submarine attack, the arrangements
for making high explosives—nothing is prepared. How, then, can England
come in, especially when we have stirred her up such a devil’s brew of
Irish civil war, window-breaking Furies, and God knows what to keep her
thoughts at home.”

“She must think of her future.”

“Ah, that is another matter. I fancy that in the future we have our own
very definite plans about England, and that your information will be
very vital to us. It is to-day or to-morrow with Mr. John Bull. If he
prefers to-day we are perfectly ready. If it is to-morrow we shall be
more ready still. I should think they would be wiser to fight with
allies than without them, but that is their own affair. This week is
their week of destiny. But you were speaking of your papers.” He sat in
the armchair with the light shining upon his broad bald head, while he
puffed sedately at his cigar.

The large oak-panelled, book-lined room had a curtain hung in the
further corner. When this was drawn it disclosed a large, brass-bound
safe. Von Bork detached a small key from his watch chain, and after
some considerable manipulation of the lock he swung open the heavy
door.

“Look!” said he, standing clear, with a wave of his hand.

The light shone vividly into the opened safe, and the secretary of the
embassy gazed with an absorbed interest at the rows of stuffed
pigeon-holes with which it was furnished. Each pigeon-hole had its
label, and his eyes as he glanced along them read a long series of such
titles as “Fords,” “Harbour-defences,” “Aeroplanes,” “Ireland,”
“Egypt,” “Portsmouth forts,” “The Channel,” “Rosythe,” and a score of
others. Each compartment was bristling with papers and plans.

“Colossal!” said the secretary. Putting down his cigar he softly
clapped his fat hands.

“And all in four years, Baron. Not such a bad show for the
hard-drinking, hard-riding country squire. But the gem of my collection
is coming and there is the setting all ready for it.” He pointed to a
space over which “Naval Signals” was printed.

“But you have a good dossier there already.”

“Out of date and waste paper. The Admiralty in some way got the alarm
and every code has been changed. It was a blow, Baron—the worst setback
in my whole campaign. But thanks to my check-book and the good Altamont
all will be well to-night.”

The Baron looked at his watch and gave a guttural exclamation of
disappointment.

“Well, I really can wait no longer. You can imagine that things are
moving at present in Carlton Terrace and that we have all to be at our
posts. I had hoped to be able to bring news of your great coup. Did
Altamont name no hour?”

Von Bork pushed over a telegram.

Will come without fail to-night and bring new sparking plugs.—ALTAMONT.


“Sparking plugs, eh?”

“You see he poses as a motor expert and I keep a full garage. In our
code everything likely to come up is named after some spare part. If he
talks of a radiator it is a battleship, of an oil pump a cruiser, and
so on. Sparking plugs are naval signals.”

“From Portsmouth at midday,” said the secretary, examining the
superscription. “By the way, what do you give him?”

“Five hundred pounds for this particular job. Of course he has a salary
as well.”

“The greedy rogue. They are useful, these traitors, but I grudge them
their blood money.”

“I grudge Altamont nothing. He is a wonderful worker. If I pay him
well, at least he delivers the goods, to use his own phrase. Besides he
is not a traitor. I assure you that our most pan-Germanic Junker is a
sucking dove in his feelings towards England as compared with a real
bitter Irish-American.”

“Oh, an Irish-American?”

“If you heard him talk you would not doubt it. Sometimes I assure you I
can hardly understand him. He seems to have declared war on the King’s
English as well as on the English king. Must you really go? He may be
here any moment.”

“No. I’m sorry, but I have already overstayed my time. We shall expect
you early to-morrow, and when you get that signal book through the
little door on the Duke of York’s steps you can put a triumphant Finis
to your record in England. What! Tokay!” He indicated a heavily sealed
dust-covered bottle which stood with two high glasses upon a salver.

“May I offer you a glass before your journey?”

“No, thanks. But it looks like revelry.”

“Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay.
He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things. I have to
study him, I assure you.” They had strolled out on to the terrace
again, and along it to the further end where at a touch from the
Baron’s chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled. “Those are the
lights of Harwich, I suppose,” said the secretary, pulling on his dust
coat. “How still and peaceful it all seems. There may be other lights
within the week, and the English coast a less tranquil place! The
heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that the good Zepplin
promises us comes true. By the way, who is that?”

Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp,
and beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman in a
country cap. She was bending over her knitting and stopping
occasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her.

“That is Martha, the only servant I have left.”

The secretary chuckled.

“She might almost personify Britannia,” said he, “with her complete
self-absorption and general air of comfortable somnolence. Well, au
revoir, Von Bork!” With a final wave of his hand he sprang into the
car, and a moment later the two golden cones from the headlights shot
through the darkness. The secretary lay back in the cushions of the
luxurious limousine, with his thoughts so full of the impending
European tragedy that he hardly observed that as his car swung round
the village street it nearly passed over a little Ford coming in the
opposite direction.

Von Bork walked slowly back to the study when the last gleams of the
motor lamps had faded into the distance. As he passed he observed that
his old housekeeper had put out her lamp and retired. It was a new
experience to him, the silence and darkness of his widespread house,
for his family and household had been a large one. It was a relief to
him, however, to think that they were all in safety and that, but for
that one old woman who had lingered in the kitchen, he had the whole
place to himself. There was a good deal of tidying up to do inside his
study and he set himself to do it until his keen, handsome face was
flushed with the heat of the burning papers. A leather valise stood
beside his table, and into this he began to pack very neatly and
systematically the precious contents of his safe. He had hardly got
started with the work, however, when his quick ears caught the sounds
of a distant car. Instantly he gave an exclamation of satisfaction,
strapped up the valise, shut the safe, locked it, and hurried out on to
the terrace. He was just in time to see the lights of a small car come
to a halt at the gate. A passenger sprang out of it and advanced
swiftly towards him, while the chauffeur, a heavily built, elderly man
with a grey moustache, settled down like one who resigns himself to a
long vigil.

“Well?” asked Von Bork eagerly, running forward to meet his visitor.

For answer the man waved a small brown-paper parcel triumphantly above
his head.

“You can give me the glad hand to-night, mister,” he cried. “I’m
bringing home the bacon at last.”

“The signals?”

“Same as I said in my cable. Every last one of them, semaphore, lamp
code, Marconi—a copy, mind you, not the original. That was too
dangerous. But it’s the real goods, and you can lay to that.” He
slapped the German upon the shoulder with a rough familiarity from
which the other winced.

“Come in,” he said. “I’m all alone in the house. I was only waiting for
this. Of course a copy is better than the original. If an original were
missing they would change the whole thing. You think it’s all safe
about the copy?”

The Irish-American had entered the study and stretched his long limbs
from the armchair. He was a tall, gaunt man of sixty, with clear-cut
features and a small goatee beard which gave him a general resemblance
to the caricatures of Uncle Sam. A half-smoked, sodden cigar hung from
the corner of his mouth, and as he sat down he struck a match and relit
it. “Making ready for a move?” he remarked as he looked round him.
“Say, mister,” he added, as his eyes fell upon the safe from which the
curtain was now removed, “you don’t tell me you keep your papers in
that?”

“Why not?”

“Gosh, in a wide-open contraption like that! And they reckon you to be
some spy. Why, a Yankee crook would be into that with a can-opener. If
I’d known that any letter of mine was goin’ to lie loose in a thing
like that I’d have been a mug to write to you at all.”

“It would puzzle any crook to force that safe,” Von Bork answered. “You
won’t cut that metal with any tool.”

“But the lock?”

“No, it’s a double combination lock. You know what that is?”

“Search me,” said the American.

“Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get
the lock to work.” He rose and showed a double-radiating disc round the
keyhole. “This outer one is for the letters, the inner one for the
figures.”

“Well, well, that’s fine.”

“So it’s not quite as simple as you thought. It was four years ago that
I had it made, and what do you think I chose for the word and figures?”

“It’s beyond me.”

“Well, I chose August for the word, and 1914 for the figures, and here
we are.”

The American’s face showed his surprise and admiration.

“My, but that was smart! You had it down to a fine thing.”

“Yes, a few of us even then could have guessed the date. Here it is,
and I’m shutting down to-morrow morning.”

“Well, I guess you’ll have to fix me up also. I’m not staying in this
goldarned country all on my lonesome. In a week or less, from what I
see, John Bull will be on his hind legs and fair ramping. I’d rather
watch him from over the water.”

“But you’re an American citizen?”

“Well, so was Jack James an American citizen, but he’s doing time in
Portland all the same. It cuts no ice with a British copper to tell him
you’re an American citizen. ‘It’s British law and order over here,’
says he. By the way, mister, talking of Jack James, it seems to me you
don’t do much to cover your men.”

“What do you mean?” Von Bork asked sharply.

“Well, you are their employer, ain’t you? It’s up to you to see that
they don’t fall down. But they do fall down, and when did you ever pick
them up? There’s James—”

“It was James’s own fault. You know that yourself. He was too
self-willed for the job.”

“James was a bonehead—I give you that. Then there was Hollis.”

“The man was mad.”

“Well, he went a bit woozy towards the end. It’s enough to make a man
bug-house when he has to play a part from morning to night with a
hundred guys all ready to set the coppers wise to him. But now there is
Steiner—”

Von Bork started violently, and his ruddy face turned a shade paler.

“What about Steiner?”

“Well, they’ve got him, that’s all. They raided his store last night,
and he and his papers are all in Portsmouth jail. You’ll go off and he,
poor devil, will have to stand the racket, and lucky if he gets off
with his life. That’s why I want to get over the water as soon as you
do.”

Von Bork was a strong, self-contained man, but it was easy to see that
the news had shaken him.

“How could they have got on to Steiner?” he muttered. “That’s the worst
blow yet.”

“Well, you nearly had a worse one, for I believe they are not far off
me.”

“You don’t mean that!”

“Sure thing. My landlady down Fratton way had some inquiries, and when
I heard of it I guessed it was time for me to hustle. But what I want
to know, mister, is how the coppers know these things? Steiner is the
fifth man you’ve lost since I signed on with you, and I know the name
of the sixth if I don’t get a move on. How do you explain it, and ain’t
you ashamed to see your men go down like this?”

Von Bork flushed crimson.

“How dare you speak in such a way!”

“If I didn’t dare things, mister, I wouldn’t be in your service. But
I’ll tell you straight what is in my mind. I’ve heard that with you
German politicians when an agent has done his work you are not sorry to
see him put away.”

Von Bork sprang to his feet.

“Do you dare to suggest that I have given away my own agents!”

“I don’t stand for that, mister, but there’s a stool pigeon or a cross
somewhere, and it’s up to you to find out where it is. Anyhow I am
taking no more chances. It’s me for little Holland, and the sooner the
better.”

Von Bork had mastered his anger.

“We have been allies too long to quarrel now at the very hour of
victory,” he said. “You’ve done splendid work and taken risks, and I
can’t forget it. By all means go to Holland, and you can get a boat
from Rotterdam to New York. No other line will be safe a week from now.
I’ll take that book and pack it with the rest.”

The American held the small parcel in his hand, but made no motion to
give it up.

“What about the dough?” he asked.

“The what?”

“The boodle. The reward. The £500. The gunner turned damned nasty at
the last, and I had to square him with an extra hundred dollars or it
would have been nitsky for you and me. ‘Nothin’ doin’!’ says he, and he
meant it, too, but the last hundred did it. It’s cost me two hundred
pound from first to last, so it isn’t likely I’d give it up without
gettin’ my wad.”

Von Bork smiled with some bitterness. “You don’t seem to have a very
high opinion of my honour,” said he, “you want the money before you
give up the book.”

“Well, mister, it is a business proposition.”

“All right. Have your way.” He sat down at the table and scribbled a
check, which he tore from the book, but he refrained from handing it to
his companion. “After all, since we are to be on such terms, Mr.
Altamont,” said he, “I don’t see why I should trust you any more than
you trust me. Do you understand?” he added, looking back over his
shoulder at the American. “There’s the check upon the table. I claim
the right to examine that parcel before you pick the money up.”

The American passed it over without a word. Von Bork undid a winding of
string and two wrappers of paper. Then he sat gazing for a moment in
silent amazement at a small blue book which lay before him. Across the
cover was printed in golden letters _Practical Handbook of Bee
Culture_. Only for one instant did the master spy glare at this
strangely irrelevant inscription. The next he was gripped at the back
of his neck by a grasp of iron, and a chloroformed sponge was held in
front of his writhing face.

“Another glass, Watson!” said Mr. Sherlock Holmes as he extended the
bottle of Imperial Tokay.

The thickset chauffeur, who had seated himself by the table, pushed
forward his glass with some eagerness.

“It is a good wine, Holmes.”

“A remarkable wine, Watson. Our friend upon the sofa has assured me
that it is from Franz Josef’s special cellar at the Schoenbrunn Palace.
Might I trouble you to open the window, for chloroform vapour does not
help the palate.”

The safe was ajar, and Holmes standing in front of it was removing
dossier after dossier, swiftly examining each, and then packing it
neatly in Von Bork’s valise. The German lay upon the sofa sleeping
stertorously with a strap round his upper arms and another round his
legs.

“We need not hurry ourselves, Watson. We are safe from interruption.
Would you mind touching the bell? There is no one in the house except
old Martha, who has played her part to admiration. I got her the
situation here when first I took the matter up. Ah, Martha, you will be
glad to hear that all is well.”

The pleasant old lady had appeared in the doorway. She curtseyed with a
smile to Mr. Holmes, but glanced with some apprehension at the figure
upon the sofa.

“It is all right, Martha. He has not been hurt at all.”

“I am glad of that, Mr. Holmes. According to his lights he has been a
kind master. He wanted me to go with his wife to Germany yesterday, but
that would hardly have suited your plans, would it, sir?”

“No, indeed, Martha. So long as you were here I was easy in my mind. We
waited some time for your signal to-night.”

“It was the secretary, sir.”

“I know. His car passed ours.”

“I thought he would never go. I knew that it would not suit your plans,
sir, to find him here.”

“No, indeed. Well, it only meant that we waited half an hour or so
until I saw your lamp go out and knew that the coast was clear. You can
report to me to-morrow in London, Martha, at Claridge’s Hotel.”

“Very good, sir.”

“I suppose you have everything ready to leave.”

“Yes, sir. He posted seven letters to-day. I have the addresses as
usual.”

“Very good, Martha. I will look into them to-morrow. Good-night. These
papers,” he continued as the old lady vanished, “are not of very great
importance, for, of course, the information which they represent has
been sent off long ago to the German government. These are the
originals which could not safely be got out of the country.”

“Then they are of no use.”

“I should not go so far as to say that, Watson. They will at least show
our people what is known and what is not. I may say that a good many of
these papers have come through me, and I need not add are thoroughly
untrustworthy. It would brighten my declining years to see a German
cruiser navigating the Solent according to the mine-field plans which I
have furnished. But you, Watson”—he stopped his work and took his old
friend by the shoulders—“I’ve hardly seen you in the light yet. How
have the years used you? You look the same blithe boy as ever.”

“I feel twenty years younger, Holmes. I have seldom felt so happy as
when I got your wire asking me to meet you at Harwich with the car. But
you, Holmes—you have changed very little—save for that horrible
goatee.”

“These are the sacrifices one makes for one’s country, Watson,” said
Holmes, pulling at his little tuft. “To-morrow it will be but a
dreadful memory. With my hair cut and a few other superficial changes I
shall no doubt reappear at Claridge’s to-morrow as I was before this
American stunt—I beg your pardon, Watson, my well of English seems to
be permanently defiled—before this American job came my way.”

“But you have retired, Holmes. We heard of you as living the life of a
hermit among your bees and your books in a small farm upon the South
Downs.”

“Exactly, Watson. Here is the fruit of my leisured ease, the magnum
opus of my latter years!” He picked up the volume from the table and
read out the whole title, _Practical Handbook of Bee Culture, with Some
Observations upon the Segregation of the Queen_. “Alone I did it.
Behold the fruit of pensive nights and laborious days when I watched
the little working gangs as once I watched the criminal world of
London.”

“But how did you get to work again?”

“Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself. The Foreign Minister alone I
could have withstood, but when the Premier also deigned to visit my
humble roof—! The fact is, Watson, that this gentleman upon the sofa
was a bit too good for our people. He was in a class by himself. Things
were going wrong, and no one could understand why they were going
wrong. Agents were suspected or even caught, but there was evidence of
some strong and secret central force. It was absolutely necessary to
expose it. Strong pressure was brought upon me to look into the matter.
It has cost me two years, Watson, but they have not been devoid of
excitement. When I say that I started my pilgrimage at Chicago,
graduated in an Irish secret society at Buffalo, gave serious trouble
to the constabulary at Skibbareen, and so eventually caught the eye of
a subordinate agent of Von Bork, who recommended me as a likely man,
you will realise that the matter was complex. Since then I have been
honoured by his confidence, which has not prevented most of his plans
going subtly wrong and five of his best agents being in prison. I
watched them, Watson, and I picked them as they ripened. Well, sir, I
hope that you are none the worse!”

The last remark was addressed to Von Bork himself, who after much
gasping and blinking had lain quietly listening to Holmes’s statement.
He broke out now into a furious stream of German invective, his face
convulsed with passion. Holmes continued his swift investigation of
documents while his prisoner cursed and swore.

“Though unmusical, German is the most expressive of all languages,” he
observed when Von Bork had stopped from pure exhaustion. “Hullo!
Hullo!” he added as he looked hard at the corner of a tracing before
putting it in the box. “This should put another bird in the cage. I had
no idea that the paymaster was such a rascal, though I have long had an
eye upon him. Mister Von Bork, you have a great deal to answer for.”

The prisoner had raised himself with some difficulty upon the sofa and
was staring with a strange mixture of amazement and hatred at his
captor.

“I shall get level with you, Altamont,” he said, speaking with slow
deliberation. “If it takes me all my life I shall get level with you!”

“The old sweet song,” said Holmes. “How often have I heard it in days
gone by. It was a favorite ditty of the late lamented Professor
Moriarty. Colonel Sebastian Moran has also been known to warble it. And
yet I live and keep bees upon the South Downs.”

“Curse you, you double traitor!” cried the German, straining against
his bonds and glaring murder from his furious eyes.

“No, no, it is not so bad as that,” said Holmes, smiling. “As my speech
surely shows you, Mr. Altamont of Chicago had no existence in fact. I
used him and he is gone.”

“Then who are you?”

“It is really immaterial who I am, but since the matter seems to
interest you, Mr. Von Bork, I may say that this is not my first
acquaintance with the members of your family. I have done a good deal
of business in Germany in the past and my name is probably familiar to
you.”

“I would wish to know it,” said the Prussian grimly.

“It was I who brought about the separation between Irene Adler and the
late King of Bohemia when your cousin Heinrich was the Imperial Envoy.
It was I also who saved from murder, by the Nihilist Klopman, Count Von
und Zu Grafenstein, who was your mother’s elder brother. It was I—”

Von Bork sat up in amazement.

“There is only one man,” he cried.

“Exactly,” said Holmes.

Von Bork groaned and sank back on the sofa. “And most of that
information came through you,” he cried. “What is it worth? What have I
done? It is my ruin forever!”

“It is certainly a little untrustworthy,” said Holmes. “It will require
some checking and you have little time to check it. Your admiral may
find the new guns rather larger than he expects, and the cruisers
perhaps a trifle faster.”

Von Bork clutched at his own throat in despair.

“There are a good many other points of detail which will, no doubt,
come to light in good time. But you have one quality which is very rare
in a German, Mr. Von Bork: you are a sportsman and you will bear me no
ill-will when you realise that you, who have outwitted so many other
people, have at last been outwitted yourself. After all, you have done
your best for your country, and I have done my best for mine, and what
could be more natural? Besides,” he added, not unkindly, as he laid his
hand upon the shoulder of the prostrate man, “it is better than to fall
before some ignoble foe. These papers are now ready, Watson. If you
will help me with our prisoner, I think that we may get started for
London at once.”

It was no easy task to move Von Bork, for he was a strong and a
desperate man. Finally, holding either arm, the two friends walked him
very slowly down the garden walk which he had trod with such proud
confidence when he received the congratulations of the famous
diplomatist only a few hours before. After a short, final struggle he
was hoisted, still bound hand and foot, into the spare seat of the
little car. His precious valise was wedged in beside him.

“I trust that you are as comfortable as circumstances permit,” said
Holmes when the final arrangements were made. “Should I be guilty of a
liberty if I lit a cigar and placed it between your lips?”

But all amenities were wasted upon the angry German.

“I suppose you realise, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said he, “that if your
government bears you out in this treatment it becomes an act of war.”

“What about your government and all this treatment?” said Holmes,
tapping the valise.

“You are a private individual. You have no warrant for my arrest. The
whole proceeding is absolutely illegal and outrageous.”

“Absolutely,” said Holmes.

“Kidnapping a German subject.”

“And stealing his private papers.”

“Well, you realise your position, you and your accomplice here. If I
were to shout for help as we pass through the village—”

“My dear sir, if you did anything so foolish you would probably enlarge
the two limited titles of our village inns by giving us ‘The Dangling
Prussian’ as a signpost. The Englishman is a patient creature, but at
present his temper is a little inflamed, and it would be as well not to
try him too far. No, Mr. Von Bork, you will go with us in a quiet,
sensible fashion to Scotland Yard, whence you can send for your friend,
Baron Von Herling, and see if even now you may not fill that place
which he has reserved for you in the ambassadorial suite. As to you,
Watson, you are joining us with your old service, as I understand, so
London won’t be out of your way. Stand with me here upon the terrace,
for it may be the last quiet talk that we shall ever have.”

The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes,
recalling once again the days of the past, while their prisoner vainly
wriggled to undo the bonds that held him. As they turned to the car
Holmes pointed back to the moonlit sea and shook a thoughtful head.

“There’s an east wind coming, Watson.”

“I think not, Holmes. It is very warm.”

“Good old Watson! You are the one fixed point in a changing age.
There’s an east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blew on
England yet. It will be cold and bitter, Watson, and a good many of us
may wither before its blast. But it’s God’s own wind none the less, and
a cleaner, better, stronger land will lie in the sunshine when the
storm has cleared. Start her up, Watson, for it’s time that we were on
our way. I have a check for five hundred pounds which should be cashed
early, for the drawer is quite capable of stopping it if he can.”