VIII

THE ADVENTURE OF THE CREEPING MAN

Mr. Sherlock Holmes was always of opinion that I should publish the
singular facts connected with Professor Presbury, if only to dispel
once for all the ugly rumours which some twenty years ago agitated the
University and were echoed in the learned societies of London.  There
were, however, certain obstacles in the way, and the true history of
this curious case remained entombed in the tin box which contains so
many records of my friend's adventures.  Now we have at last obtained
permission to ventilate the facts which formed one of the very last
cases handled by Holmes before his retirement from practice.  Even now
a certain reticence and discretion have to be observed in laying the
matter before the public.


It was one Sunday evening early in September of the year 1903 that I
received one of Holmes's laconic messages: "Come at once if
convenient--if inconvenient come all the same.--S.H."  The relations
between us in those latter days were peculiar.  He was a man of habits,
narrow and concentrated habits, and I had become one of them.  As an
institution I was like the violin, the shag tobacco, the old black
pipe, the index books, and others perhaps less excusable.  When it was
a case of active work and a comrade was needed upon whose nerve he
could place some reliance, my role was obvious.  But apart from this I
had uses.  I was a whetstone for his mind.  I stimulated him.  He liked
to think aloud in my presence.  His remarks could hardly be said to be
made to me--many of them would have been as appropriately addressed to
his bedstead--but none the less, having formed the habit, it had become
in some way helpful that I should register and interject.  If I
irritated him by a certain methodical slowness in my mentality, that
irritation served only to make his own flame-like intuitions and
impressions flash up the more vividly and swiftly.  Such was my humble
role in our alliance.

When I arrived at Baker Street I found him huddled up in his arm-chair
with updrawn knees, his pipe in his mouth and his brow furrowed with
thought.  It was clear that he was in the throes of some vexatious
problem.  With a wave of his hand he indicated my old arm-chair, but
otherwise for half an hour he gave no sign that he was aware of my
presence.  Then with a start he seemed to come from his reverie, and,
with his usual whimsical smile, he greeted me back to what had once
been my home.

"You will excuse a certain abstraction of mind, my dear Watson," said
he.  "Some curious facts have been submitted to me within the last
twenty-four hours, and they in turn have given rise to some
speculations of a more general character.  I have serious thoughts of
writing a small monograph upon the uses of dogs in the work of the
detective."

"But surely, Holmes, this has been explored," said I.
"Bloodhounds--sleuth-hounds----"

"No, no, Watson; that side of the matter is, of course, obvious.  But
there is another which is far more subtle.  You may recollect that in
the case which you, in your sensational way, coupled with the Copper
Beeches, I was able, by watching the mind of the child, to form a
deduction as to the criminal habits of the very smug and respectable
father."

"Yes, I remember it well."

"My line of thoughts about dogs is analogous.  A dog reflects the
family life.  Whoever saw a frisky dog in a gloomy family, or a sad dog
in a happy one?  Snarling people have snarling dogs, dangerous people
have dangerous ones.  And their passing moods may reflect the passing
moods of others."

I shook my head.  "Surely, Holmes, this is a little far-fetched," said
I.

He had refilled his pipe and resumed his seat, taking no notice of my
comment.

"The practical application of what I have said is very close to the
problem which I am investigating.  It is a tangled skein, you
understand, and I am looking for a loose end.  One possible loose end
lies in the question: Why does Professor Presbury's faithful
wolf-hound, Roy, endeavour to bite him?"

I sank back in my chair in some disappointment.  Was it for so trivial
a question as this that I had been summoned from my work?  Holmes
glanced across at me.

"The same old Watson!" said he.  "You never learn that the gravest
issues may depend upon the smallest things.  But is it not on the face
of it strange that a staid, elderly philosopher--you've heard of
Presbury, of course, the famous Camford physiologist?--that such a man,
whose friend has been his devoted wolf-hound, should now have been
twice attacked by his own dog?  What do you make of it?"

"The dog is ill."

"Well, that has to be considered.  But he attacks no one else, nor does
he apparently molest his master, save on very special occasions.
Curious, Watson--very curious.  But young Mr. Bennett is before his
time, if that is his ring.  I had hoped to have a longer chat with you
before he came."

There was a quick step on the stairs, a sharp tap at the door, and a
moment later the new client presented himself.  He was a tall, handsome
youth about thirty, well dressed and elegant, but with something in his
bearing which suggested the shyness of the student rather than the
self-possession of the man of the world.  He shook hands with Holmes,
and then looked with some surprise at me.

"This matter is very delicate, Mr. Holmes," he said.  "Consider the
relation in which I stand to Professor Presbury, both privately and
publicly.  I really can hardly justify myself if I speak before any
third person."

"Have no fear, Mr. Bennett.  Dr. Watson is the very soul of discretion,
and I can assure you that this is a matter in which I am very likely to
need an assistant."

"As you like, Mr. Holmes.  You will, I am sure, understand my having
some reserves in the matter."

"You will appreciate it, Watson, when I tell you that this gentleman,
Mr. Trevor Bennett, is professional assistant to the great scientist,
lives under his roof, and is engaged to his only daughter.  Certainly
we must agree that the Professor has every claim upon his loyalty and
devotion.  But it may best be shown by taking the necessary steps to
clear up this strange mystery."

"I hope so, Mr. Holmes.  That is my one object.  Does Dr. Watson know
the situation?"

"I have not had time to explain it."

"Then perhaps I had better go over the ground again before explaining
some fresh developments."

"I will do so myself," said Holmes, "in order to show that I have the
events in their due order.  The Professor, Watson, is a man of European
reputation.  His life has been academic.  There has never been a breath
of scandal.  He is a widower with one daughter, Edith.  He is, I
gather, a man of very virile and positive, one might almost say
combative, character.  So the matter stood until a very few months ago.

"Then the current of his life was broken.  He is sixty-one years of
age, but he became engaged to the daughter of Professor Morphy, his
colleague in the chair of Comparative Anatomy.  It was not, as I
understand, the reasoned courting of an elderly man, but rather the
passionate frenzy of youth, for no one could have shown himself a more
devoted lover.  The lady, Alice Morphy, was a very perfect girl both in
mind and body, so that there was every excuse for the Professor's
infatuation.  Nonetheless, it did not meet with full approval in his
own family."

"We thought it rather excessive," said our visitor.

"Exactly.  Excessive and a little violent and unnatural.  Professor
Presbury was rich, however, and there was no objection upon the part of
the father.  The daughter, however, had other views, and there were
already several candidates for her hand, who, if they were less
eligible from a worldly point of view, were at least more of an age.
The girl seemed to like the Professor in spite of his eccentricities.
It was only age which stood in the way.

"About this time a little mystery suddenly clouded the normal routine
of the Professor's life.  He did what he had never done before.  He
left home and gave no indication where he was going.  He was away a
fortnight, and returned looking rather travel-worn.  He made no
allusion to where he had been, although he was usually the frankest of
men.  It chanced, however, that our client here, Mr. Bennett, received
a letter from a fellow-student in Prague, who said that he was glad to
have seen Professor Presbury there, although he had not been able to
talk to him.  Only in this way did his own household learn where he had
been.

"Now comes the point.  From that time onwards a curious change came
over the Professor.  He became furtive and sly.  Those around him had
always the feeling that he was not the man that they had known, but
that he was under some shadow which had darkened his higher qualities.
His intellect was not affected.  His lectures were as brilliant as
ever.  But always there was something new, something sinister and
unexpected.  His daughter, who was devoted to him, tried again and
again to resume the old relations and to penetrate this mask which her
father seemed to have put on.  You, sir, as I understand, did the
same--but all was in vain.  And now, Mr. Bennett, tell in your own
words the incident of the letters."

"You must understand, Dr. Watson, that the Professor had no secrets
from me.  If I were his son or his younger brother, I could not have
more completely enjoyed his confidence.  As his secretary I handled
every paper which came to him, and I opened and subdivided his letters.
Shortly after his return all this was changed.  He told me that certain
letters might come to him from London which would be marked by a cross
under the stamp.  These were to be set aside for his own eyes only.  I
may say that several of these did pass through my hands, that they had
the E.C. mark, and were in an illiterate handwriting.  If he answered
them at all the answers did not pass through my hands nor into the
letter-basket in which our correspondence was collected."

"And the box," said Holmes.

"Ah, yes, the box.  The Professor brought back a little wooden box from
his travels.  It was the one thing which suggested a Continental tour,
for it was one of those quaint carved things which one associates with
Germany.  This he placed in his instrument cupboard.  One day, in
looking for a cannula, I took up the box.  To my surprise he was very
angry, and reproved me in words which were quite savage for my
curiosity.  It was the first time such a thing had happened and I was
deeply hurt.  I endeavoured to explain that it was a mere accident that
I had touched the box, but all the evening I was conscious that he
looked at me harshly and that the incident was rankling in his mind."
Mr. Bennett drew a little diary book from his pocket.  "That was on
July 2," said he.

"You are certainly an admirable witness," said Holmes.  "I may need
some of these dates which you have noted."

"I learned method among other things from my great teacher.  From the
time that I observed abnormality in his behaviour I felt that it was my
duty to study his case.  Thus I have it here that it was on that very
day, July 2, that Roy attacked the Professor, as he came from his study
into the hall.  Again on July 11, there was a scene of the same sort
and then I have a note of yet another upon July 20.  After that we had
to banish Roy to the stables.  He was a dear, affectionate animal--but
I fear I weary you."

Mr. Bennett spoke in a tone of reproach, for it was very clear that
Holmes was not listening.  His face was rigid and his eyes gazed
abstractedly at the ceiling.  With an effort he recovered himself.

"Singular!  Most singular!" he murmured.  "These details were new to
me, Mr. Bennett.  I think we have now fairly gone over the old ground,
have we not?  But you spoke of some fresh developments."

The pleasant, open face of our visitor clouded over, shadowed by some
grim remembrance.  "What I speak of occurred the night before last,"
said he.  "I was lying awake about two in the morning, when I was aware
of a dull muffled sound coming from the passage.  I opened my door and
peeped out.  I should explain that the Professor sleeps at the end of
the passage----"

"The date being----?" asked Holmes.

Our visitor was clearly annoyed at so irrelevant an interruption.

"I have said, sir, that it was the night before last--that is,
September 4."

Holmes nodded and smiled.

"Pray continue," said he.

"He sleeps at the end of the passage, and would have to pass my door in
order to reach the staircase.  It was a really terrifying experience,
Mr. Holmes.  I think that I am as strong-nerved as my neighbours, but I
was shaken by what I saw.  The passage was dark save that one window
half-way along it threw a patch of light.  I could see that something
was coming along the passage, something dark and crouching.  Then
suddenly it emerged into the light, and I saw that it was he.  He was
crawling, Mr. Holmes--crawling!  He was not quite on his hands and
knees.  I should rather say on his hands and feet, with his face sunk
between his hands.  Yet he seemed to move with ease.  I was so
paralysed by the sight that it was not until he had reached my door
that I was able to step forward and ask if I could assist him.  His
answer was extraordinary.  He sprang up, spat out some atrocious word
at me, and hurried on past me, and down the staircase.  I waited about
for an hour, but he did not come back.  It must have been daylight
before he regained his room."

"Well, Watson, what make you of that?" asked Holmes, with the air of
the pathologist who presents a rare specimen.

"Lumbago, possibly.  I have known a severe attack make a man walk in
just such a way, and nothing would be more trying to the temper."

"Good, Watson!  You always keep us flat-footed on the ground.  But we
can hardly accept lumbago, since he was able to stand erect in a
moment."

"He was never better in health," said Bennett.  "In fact, he is
stronger than I have known him for years.  But there are the facts, Mr.
Holmes.  It is not a case in which we can consult the police, and yet
we are utterly at our wits' end as to what to do, and we feel in some
strange way that we are drifting towards disaster.  Edith--Miss
Presbury--feels as I do, that we cannot wait passively any longer."

"It is certainly a very curious and suggestive case.  What do you
think, Watson?"

"Speaking as a medical man," said I, "it appears to be a case for an
alienist.  The old gentleman's cerebral processes were disturbed by the
love affair.  He made a journey abroad in the hope of breaking himself
of the passion.  His letters and the box may be connected with some
other private transaction--a loan, perhaps, or share certificates,
which are in the box."

"And the wolf-hound no doubt disapproved of the financial bargain.  No,
no, Watson, there is more in it than this.  Now, I can only suggest----"

What Sherlock Holmes was about to suggest will never be known, for at
this moment the door opened and a young lady was shown into the room.
As she appeared Mr. Bennett sprang up with a cry and ran forward with
his hands out to meet those which she had herself outstretched.

"Edith, dear!  Nothing the matter, I hope?"

"I felt I must follow you.  Oh, Jack, I have been so dreadfully
frightened!  It is awful to be there alone."

"Mr. Holmes, this is the young lady I spoke of.  This is my fiancée."

"We were gradually coming to that conclusion, were we not, Watson?"
Holmes answered, with a smile.  "I take it, Miss Presbury, that there
is some fresh development in the case, and that you thought we should
know?"

Our new visitor, a bright, handsome girl of a conventional English
type, smiled back at Holmes as she seated herself beside Mr. Bennett.

"When I found Mr. Bennett had left his hotel I thought I should
probably find him here.  Of course, he had told me that he would
consult you.  But, oh, Mr. Holmes, can you do nothing for my poor
father?"


"I have hopes, Miss Presbury, but the case is still obscure.  Perhaps
what you have to say may throw some fresh light upon it."

"It was last night, Mr. Holmes.  He had been very strange all day.  I
am sure that there are times when he has no recollection of what he
does.  He lives as in a strange dream.  Yesterday was such a day.  It
was not my father with whom I lived.  His outward shell was there, but
it was not really he."

"Tell me what happened."

"I was awakened in the night by the dog barking most furiously.  Poor
Roy, he is chained now near the stable.  I may say that I always sleep
with my door locked; for, as Jack--as Mr. Bennett--will tell you, we
all have a feeling of impending danger.  My room is on the second
floor.  It happened that the blind was up in my window, and there was
bright moonlight outside.  As I lay with my eyes fixed upon the square
of light, listening to the frenzied barkings of the dog, I was amazed
to see my father's face looking in at me.  Mr. Holmes, I nearly died of
surprise and horror.  There it was pressed against the window-pane, and
one hand seemed to be raised as if to push up the window.  If that
window had opened, I think I should have gone mad.  It was no delusion,
Mr. Holmes.  Don't deceive yourself by thinking so.  I dare say it was
twenty seconds or so that I lay paralysed and watched the face.  Then
it vanished, but I could not--I could not spring out of bed and look
out after it.  I lay cold and shivering till morning.  At breakfast he
was sharp and fierce in manner, and made no allusion to the adventure
of the night.  Neither did I, but I gave an excuse for coming to
town--and here I am."

Holmes looked thoroughly surprised at Miss Presbury's narrative.

"My dear young lady, you say that your room is on the second floor.  Is
there a long ladder in the garden?"

"No, Mr. Holmes; that is the amazing part of it.  There is no possible
way of reaching the window--and yet he was there."

"The date being September 5," said Holmes.  "That certainly complicates
matters."

It was the young lady's turn to look surprised.  "This is the second
time that you have alluded to the date, Mr. Holmes," said Bennett.  "Is
it possible that it has any bearing upon the case?"

"It is possible--very possible--and yet I have not my full material at
present."

"Possibly you are thinking of the connection between insanity and
phases of the moon?"

"No, I assure you.  It was quite a different line of thought.  Possibly
you can leave your notebook with me and I will check the dates.  Now I
think, Watson, that our line of action is perfectly clear.  This young
lady has informed us--and I have the greatest confidence in her
intuition--that her father remembers little or nothing which occurs
upon certain dates.  We will therefore call upon him as if he had given
us an appointment upon such a date.  He will put it down to his own
lack of memory.  Thus we will open our campaign by having a good close
view of him."

"That is excellent," said Mr. Bennett.  "I warn you, however, that the
Professor is irascible and violent at times."

Holmes smiled.  "There are reasons why we should come at once--very
cogent reasons if my theories hold good.  To-morrow, Mr. Bennett, will
certainly see us in Camford.  There is, if I remember right, an inn
called the 'Chequers' where the port used to be above mediocrity, and
the linen was above reproach.  I think, Watson, that our lot for the
next few days might lie in less pleasant places."

Monday morning found us on our way to the famous University town--an
easy effort on the part of Holmes, who had no roots to pull up, but one
which involved frantic planning and hurrying on my part, as my practice
was by this time not inconsiderable.  Holmes made no allusion to the
case until after we had deposited our suit-cases at the ancient hostel
of which he had spoken.

"I think, Watson, that we can catch the Professor just before lunch.
He lectures at eleven, and should have an interval at home."

"What possible excuse have we for calling?"

Holmes glanced at his notebook.

"There was a period of excitement upon August 26.  We will assume that
he is a little hazy as to what he does at such times.  If we insist
that we are there by appointment I think he will hardly venture to
contradict us.  Have you the effrontery necessary to put it through?"

"We can but try."

"Excellent, Watson!  Compound of the Busy Bee and Excelsior.  We can
but try--the motto of the firm.  A friendly native will surely guide
us."

Such a one on the back of a smart hansom swept us past a row of ancient
colleges, and finally turning into a tree-lined drive pulled up at the
door of a charming house, girt round with lawns and covered with purple
wistaria.  Professor Presbury was certainly surrounded with every sign
not only of comfort but of luxury.  Even as we pulled up a grizzled
head appeared at the front window, and we were aware of a pair of keen
eyes from under shaggy brows which surveyed us through large horn
glasses.  A moment later we were actually in his sanctum, and the
mysterious scientist, whose vagaries had brought us from London, was
standing before us.  There was certainly no sign of eccentricity either
in his manner or appearance, for he was a portly, large-featured man,
grave, tall, and frock-coated, with the dignity of bearing which a
lecturer needs.  His eyes were his most remarkable feature, keen,
observant, and clever to the verge of cunning.

He looked at our cards.  "Pray sit down, gentlemen.  What can I do for
you?"

Mr. Holmes smiled amiably.

"It was the question which I was about to put to you, Professor."

"To me, sir!"

"Possibly there is some mistake.  I heard through a second person that
Professor Presbury of Camford had need of my services."

"Oh, indeed!"  It seemed to me that there was a malicious sparkle in
the intense grey eyes.  "You heard that, did you?  May I ask the name
of your informant?"

"I am sorry, Professor, but the matter was rather confidential.  If I
have made a mistake there is no harm done.  I can only express my
regret."

"Not at all.  I should wish to go further into this matter.  It
interests me.  Have you any scrap of writing, any letter or telegram,
to bear out your assertion?"

"No, I have not."

"I presume that you do not go so far as to assert that I summoned you?"

"I would rather answer no questions," said Holmes.

"No, I dare say not," said the Professor, with asperity.  "However,
that particular one can be answered very easily without your aid."

He walked across the room to the bell.  Our London friend, Mr. Bennett,
answered the call.

"Come in, Mr. Bennett.  These two gentlemen have come from London under
the impression that they have been summoned.  You handle all my
correspondence.  Have you a note of anything going to a person named
Holmes?"

"No, sir," Bennett answered, with a flush.

"That is conclusive," said the Professor, glaring angrily at my
companion.  "Now, sir"--he leaned forward with his two hands upon the
table--"it seems to me that your position is a very questionable one."

Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

"I can only repeat that I am sorry that we have made a needless
intrusion."

"Hardly enough, Mr. Holmes!" the old man cried, in a high screaming
voice, with extraordinary malignancy upon his face.  He got between us
and the door as he spoke, and he shook his two hands at us with furious
passion.  "You can hardly get out of it so easily as that."  His face
was convulsed and he grinned and gibbered at us in his senseless rage.
I am convinced that we should have had to fight our way out of the room
if Mr. Bennett had not intervened.

"My dear Professor," he cried, "consider your position!  Consider the
scandal at the University!  Mr. Holmes is a well-known man.  You cannot
possibly treat him with such discourtesy."

Sulkily our host--if I may call him so--cleared the path to the door.
We were glad to find ourselves outside the house, and in the quiet of
the tree-lined drive.  Holmes seemed greatly amused by the episode.

"Our learned friend's nerves are somewhat out of order," said he.
"Perhaps our intrusion was a little crude, and yet we have gained that
personal contact which I desired.  But, dear me, Watson, he is surely
at our heels.  The villain still pursues us."

There were the sounds of running feet behind, but it was, to my relief,
not the formidable Professor but his assistant who appeared round the
curve of the drive.  He came panting up to us.

"I am so sorry, Mr. Holmes.  I wished to apologize."

"My dear sir, there is no need.  It is all in the way of professional
experience."

"I have never seen him in a more dangerous mood.  But he grows more
sinister.  You can understand now why his daughter and I are alarmed.
And yet his mind is perfectly clear."

"Too clear!" said Holmes.  "That was my miscalculation.  It is evident
that his memory is much more reliable than I had thought.  By the way,
can we, before we go, see the window of Miss Presbury's room?"

Mr. Bennett pushed his way through some shrubs and we had a view of the
side of the house.

"It is there.  The second on the left."

"Dear me, it seems hardly accessible.  And yet you will observe that
there is a creeper below and a water-pipe above which give some
foothold."

"I could not climb it myself," said Mr. Bennett.

"Very likely.  It would certainly be a dangerous exploit for any normal
man."

"There was one other thing I wished to tell you, Mr. Holmes.  I have
the address of the man in London to whom the Professor writes.  He
seems to have written this morning and I got it from his
blotting-paper.  It is an ignoble position for a trusted secretary, but
what else can I do?"

Holmes glanced at the paper and put it into his pocket.

"Dorak--a curious name.  Slavonic, I imagine.  Well, it is an important
link in the chain.  We return to London this afternoon, Mr. Bennett.  I
see no good purpose to be served by our remaining.  We cannot arrest
the Professor, because he has done no crime, nor can we place him under
constraint, for he cannot be proved to be mad.  No action is as yet
possible."

"Then what on earth are we to do?"

"A little patience, Mr. Bennett.  Things will soon develop.  Unless I
am mistaken next Tuesday may mark a crisis.  Certainly we shall be in
Camford on that day.  Meanwhile, the general position is undeniably
unpleasant, and if Miss Presbury can prolong her visit----"

"That is easy."

"Then let her stay till we can assure her that all danger is past.
Meanwhile, let him have his way and do not cross him.  So long as he is
in a good humour all is well."

"There he is!" said Bennett, in a startled whisper.  Looking between
the branches we saw the tall, erect figure emerge from the hall door
and look around him.  He stood leaning forward, his hands swinging
straight before him, his head turning from side to side.  The secretary
with a last wave slipped off among the trees, and we saw him presently
rejoin his employer, the two entering the house together in what seemed
to be animated and even excited conversation.

"I expect the old gentleman has been putting two and two together,"
said Holmes, as we walked hotelwards.  "He struck me as having a
particularly clear and logical brain, from the little I saw of him.
Explosive, no doubt, but then from his point of view he has something
to explode about if detectives are put on his track and he suspects his
own household of doing it.  I rather fancy that friend Bennett is in
for an uncomfortable time."

Holmes stopped at a post office and sent off a telegram on our way.
The answer reached us in the evening, and he tossed it across to me.
"Have visited the Commercial Road and seen Dorak.  Suave person,
Bohemian, elderly.  Keeps large general store.--Mercer."

"Mercer is since your time," said Holmes.  "He is my general utility
man who looks up routine business.  It was important to know something
of the man with whom our Professor was so secretly corresponding.  His
nationality connects up with the Prague visit."

"Thank goodness that something connects with something," said I.  "At
present we seem to be faced by a long series of inexplicable incidents
with no bearing upon each other.  For example, what possible connection
can there be between an angry wolf-hound and a visit to Bohemia, or
either of them with a man crawling down a passage at night?  As to your
dates, that is the biggest mystification of all."

Holmes smiled and rubbed his hands.  We were, I may say, seated in the
old sitting-room of the ancient hotel, with a bottle of the famous
vintage of which Holmes had spoken on the table between us.

"Well, now, let us take the dates first," said he, his finger-tips
together and his manner as if he were addressing a class.  "This
excellent young man's diary shows that there was trouble upon July 2,
and from then onwards it seems to have been at nine-day intervals,
with, so far as I remember, only one exception.  Thus the last outbreak
upon Friday was on September 3, which also falls into the series, as
did August 26, which preceded it.  The thing is beyond coincidence."

I was forced to agree.

"Let us, then, form the provisional theory that every nine days the
Professor takes some strong drug which has a passing but highly
poisonous effect.  His naturally violent nature is intensified by it.
He learned to take this drug while he was in Prague, and is now
supplied with it by a Bohemian intermediary in London.  This all hangs
together, Watson!"

"But the dog, the face at the window, the creeping man in the passage?"

"Well, well, we have made a beginning.  I should not expect any fresh
developments until next Tuesday.  In the meantime we can only keep in
touch with friend Bennett and enjoy the amenities of this charming
town."


In the morning Mr. Bennett slipped round to bring us the latest report.
As Holmes had imagined, times had not been easy with him.  Without
exactly accusing him of being responsible for our presence, the
Professor had been very rough and rude in his speech, and evidently
felt some strong grievance.  This morning he was quite himself again,
however, and had delivered his usual brilliant lecture to a crowded
class.  "Apart from his queer fits," said Bennett, "he has actually
more energy and vitality than I can ever remember, nor was his brain
ever clearer.  But it's not he--it's never the man whom we have known."

"I don't think you have anything to fear now for a week at least,"
Holmes answered.  "I am a busy man, and Dr. Watson has his patients to
attend to.  Let us agree that we meet here at this hour next Tuesday,
and I shall be surprised if before we leave you again we are not able
to explain, even if we cannot perhaps put an end to, your troubles.
Meanwhile, keep us posted in what occurs."


I saw nothing of my friend for the next few days, but on the following
Monday evening I had a short note asking me to meet him next day at the
train.  From what he told me as we travelled up to Camford all was
well, the peace of the Professor's house had been unruffled, and his
own conduct perfectly normal.  This also was the report which was given
us by Mr. Bennett himself when he called upon us that evening at our
old quarters in the "Chequers."  "He heard from his London
correspondent to-day.  There was a letter and there was a small packet,
each with the cross under the stamp which warned me not to touch them.
There has been nothing else."

"That may prove quite enough," said Holmes grimly.  "Now, Mr. Bennett,
we shall, I think, come to some conclusion to-night.  If my deductions
are correct we should have an opportunity of bringing matters to a
head.  In order to do so it is necessary to hold the Professor under
observation.  I would suggest, therefore, that you remain awake and on
the look out.  Should you hear him pass your door do not interrupt him,
but follow him as discreetly as you can.  Dr. Watson and I will not be
far off.  By the way, where is the key of that little box of which you
spoke?"

"Upon his watch-chain."

"I fancy our researches must lie in that direction.  At the worst the
lock should not be very formidable.  Have you any other able-bodied man
on the premises?"

"There is the coachman, Macphail."

"Where does he sleep?"

"Over the stables."

"We might possibly want him.  Well, we can do no more until we see how
things develop.  Good-bye--but I expect that we shall see you before
morning."

It was nearly midnight before we took our station among some bushes
immediately opposite the hall door of the Professor.  It was a fine
night, but chilly, and we were glad of our warm overcoats.  There was a
breeze, and clouds were scudding across the sky, obscuring from time to
time the half-moon.  It would have been a dismal vigil were it not for
the expectation and excitement which carried us along, and the
assurance of my comrade that we had probably reached the end of the
strange sequence of events which had engaged our attention.

"If the cycle of nine days holds good then we shall have the Professor
at his worst to-night," said Holmes.  "The fact that these strange
symptoms began after his visit to Prague, that he is in secret
correspondence with a Bohemian dealer in London, who presumably
represents someone in Prague, and that he received a packet from him
this very day, all point in one direction.  What he takes and why he
takes it are still beyond our ken, but that it emanates in some way
from Prague is clear enough.  He takes it under definite directions
which regulate this ninth-day system, which was the first point which
attracted my attention.  But his symptoms are most remarkable.  Did you
observe his knuckles?"

I had to confess that I did not.

"Thick and horny in a way which is quite new in my experience.  Always
look at the hands first, Watson.  Then cuffs, trouser-knees, and boots.
Very curious knuckles which can only be explained by the mode of
progression observed by----"  Holmes paused, and suddenly clapped his
hand to his forehead.  "Oh, Watson, Watson, what a fool I have been!
It seems incredible, and yet it must be true.  All points in one
direction.  How could I miss seeing the connection of ideas?  Those
knuckles--how could I have passed those knuckles?  And the dog!  And
the ivy!  It's surely time that I disappeared into that little farm of
my dreams.  Look out, Watson!  Here he is!  We shall have the chance of
seeing for ourselves."

The hall door had slowly opened, and against the lamp-lit background we
saw the tall figure of Professor Presbury.  He was clad in his
dressing-gown.  As he stood outlined in the doorway he was erect but
leaning forward with dangling arms, as when we saw him last.

Now he stepped forward into the drive, and an extraordinary change came
over him.  He sank down into a crouching position, and moved along upon
his hands and feet, skipping every now and then as if he were
overflowing with energy and vitality.  He moved along the face of the
house and then round the corner.  As he disappeared Bennett slipped
through the hall door and softly followed him.

"Come, Watson, come!" cried Holmes, and we stole as softly as we could
through the bushes until we had gained a spot whence we could see the
other side of the house, which was bathed in the light of the
half-moon.  The Professor was clearly visible crouching at the foot of
the ivy-covered wall.  As we watched him he suddenly began with
incredible agility to ascend it.  From branch to branch he sprang, sure
of foot and firm of grasp, climbing apparently in mere joy at his own
powers, with no definite object in view.  With his dressing-gown
flapping on each side of him he looked like some huge bat glued against
the side of his own house, a great square dark patch upon the moonlit
wall.  Presently he tired of this amusement, and, dropping from branch
to branch, he squatted down into the old attitude and moved towards the
stables, creeping along in the same strange way as before.  The
wolf-hound was out now, barking furiously, and more excited than ever
when it actually caught sight of its master.  It was straining on its
chain, and quivering with eagerness and rage.  The Professor squatted
down very deliberately just out of reach of the hound, and began to
provoke it in every possible way.  He took handfuls of pebbles from the
drive and threw them in the dog's face, prodded him with a stick which
he had picked up, flicked his hands about only a few inches from the
gaping mouth, and endeavoured in every way to increase the animal's
fury, which was already beyond all control.  In all our adventures I do
not know that I have ever seen a more strange sight than this impassive
and still dignified figure crouching frog-like upon the ground and
goading to a wilder exhibition of passion the maddened hound, which
ramped and raged in front of him, by all manner of ingenious and
calculated cruelty.

And then in a moment it happened!  It was not the chain that broke, but
it was the collar that slipped, for it had been made for a thick-necked
Newfoundland.  We heard the rattle of falling metal, and the next
instant dog and man were rolling on the ground together, the one
roaring in rage, the other screaming in a strange shrill falsetto of
terror.  It was a very narrow thing for the Professor's life.  The
savage creature had him fairly by the throat, its fangs had bitten
deep, and he was senseless before we could reach them and drag the two
apart.  It might have been a dangerous task for us, but Bennett's voice
and presence brought the great wolf-hound instantly to reason.  The
uproar had brought the sleepy and astonished coachman from his room
above the stables.  "I'm not surprised," said he, shaking his head.
"I've seen him at it before.  I knew the dog would get him sooner or
later."

The hound was secured, and together we carried the Professor up to his
room, where Bennett, who had a medical degree, helped me to dress his
torn throat.  The sharp teeth had passed dangerously near the carotid
artery, and the hemorrhage was serious.  In half an hour the danger was
past, I had given the patient an injection of morphia, and he had sunk
into deep sleep.  Then, and only then, were we able to look at each
other and to take stock of the situation.

"I think a first-class surgeon should see him," said I.

"For God's sake, no!" cried Bennett.  "At present the scandal is
confined to our own household.  It is safe with us.  If it gets beyond
these walls it will never stop.  Consider his position at the
University, his European reputation, the feelings of his daughter."

"Quite so," said Holmes.  "I think it may be quite possible to keep the
matter to ourselves, and also to prevent its recurrence now that we
have a free hand.  The key from the watch-chain, Mr. Bennett.  Macphail
will guard the patient and let us know if there is any change.  Let us
see what we can find in the Professor's mysterious box."

There was not much, but there was enough--an empty phial, another
nearly full, a hypodermic syringe, several letters in a crabbed,
foreign hand.  The marks on the envelopes showed that they were those
which had disturbed the routine of the secretary, and each was dated
from the Commercial Road and signed "A. Dorak."  They were mere
invoices to say that a fresh bottle was being sent to Professor
Presbury, or receipts to acknowledge money.  There was one other
envelope, however, in a more educated hand and bearing the Austrian
stamp with the postmark of Prague.  "Here we have our material!" cried
Holmes, as he tore out the enclosure.


"HONOURED COLLEAGUE," it ran.  "Since your esteemed visit I have
thought much of your case, and though in your circumstances there are
some special reasons for the treatment, I would none the less enjoin
caution, as my results have shown that it is not without danger of a
kind.

"It is possible that the Serum of Anthropoid would have been better.  I
have, as I explained to you, used black-faced Langur because a specimen
was accessible.  Langur is, of course, a crawler and climber, while
Anthropoid walks erect, and is in all ways nearer.

"I beg you to take every possible precaution that there be no premature
revelation of the process.  I have one other client in England, and
Dorak is my agent for both.

"Weekly reports will oblige.

"Yours with high esteem,
    "H. LOWENSTEIN."


Lowenstein!  The name brought back to me the memory of some snippet
from a newspaper which spoke of an obscure scientist who was striving
in some unknown way for the secret of rejuvenescence and the elixir of
life.  Lowenstein of Prague!  Lowenstein with the wondrous
strength-giving serum, tabooed by the profession because he refused to
reveal its source.  In a few words I said what I remembered.  Bennett
had taken a manual of Zoology from the shelves.  "'Langur,'" he read,
"'the great black-faced monkey of the Himalayan slopes, biggest and
most human of climbing monkeys.'  Many details are added.  Well, thanks
to you, Mr. Holmes, it is very clear that we have traced the evil to
its source."

"The real source," said Holmes, "lies, of course, in that untimely love
affair which gave our impetuous Professor the idea that he could only
gain his wish by turning himself into a younger man.  When one tries to
rise above Nature one is liable to fall below it.  The highest type of
man may revert to the animal if he leaves the straight road of
destiny."  He sat musing for a little with the phial in his hand,
looking at the clear liquid within.  "When I have written to this man
and told him that I hold him criminally responsible for the poisons
which he circulates, we will have no more trouble.  But it may recur.
Others may find a better way.  There is danger there--a very real
danger to humanity.  Consider, Watson, that the material, the sensual,
the worldly would all prolong their worthless lives.  The spiritual
would not avoid the call to something higher.  It would be the survival
of the least fit.  What sort of cesspool may not our poor world
become?"  Suddenly the dreamer disappeared, and Holmes, the man of
action, sprang from his chair.  "I think there is nothing more to be
said, Mr. Bennett.  The various incidents will now fit themselves
easily into the general scheme.  The dog, of course, was aware of the
change far more quickly than you.  His smell would ensure that.  It was
the monkey, not the Professor, whom Roy attacked, just as it was the
monkey who teased Roy.  Climbing was a joy to the creature, and it was
a mere chance, I take it, that the pastime brought him to the young
lady's window.  There is an early train to town, Watson, but I think we
shall just have time for a cup of tea at the 'Chequers' before we catch
it."




IX

THE ADVENTURE OF THE LION'S MANE

It is a most singular thing that a problem which was certainly as
abstruse and unusual as any which I have faced in my long professional
career should have come to me after my retirement; and be brought, as
it were, to my very door.  It occurred after my withdrawal to my little
Sussex home, when I had given myself up entirely to that soothing life
of Nature for which I had so often yearned during the long years spent
amid the gloom of London.  At this period of my life the good Watson
had passed almost beyond my ken.  An occasional week-end visit was the
most that I ever saw of him.  Thus I must act as my own chronicler.
Ah! had he but been with me, how much he might have made of so
wonderful a happening and of my eventual triumph against every
difficulty!  As it is, however, I must needs tell my tale in my own
plain way, showing by my words each step upon the difficult road which
lay before me as I searched for the mystery of the Lion's Mane.

My villa is situated upon the southern slope of the Downs, commanding a
great view of the Channel.  At this point the coast-line is entirely of
chalk cliffs, which can only be descended by a single, long, tortuous
path, which is steep and slippery.  At the bottom of the path lie a
hundred yards of pebbles and shingle, even when the tide is at full.
Here and there, however, there are curves and hollows which make
splendid swimming-pools filled afresh with each flow.  This admirable
beach extends for some miles in each direction, save only at one point
where the little cove and village of Fulworth break the line.

My house is lonely.  I, my old housekeeper, and my bees have the estate
all to ourselves.  Half a mile off, however, is Harold Stackhurst's
well-known coaching establishment.  The Gables, quite a large place,
which contains some score of young fellows preparing for various
professions, with a staff of several masters.  Stackhurst himself was a
well-known rowing Blue in his day, and an excellent all-round scholar.
He and I were always friendly from the day I came to the coast, and he
was the one man who was on such terms with me that we could drop in on
each other in the evenings without an invitation.

Towards the end of July, 1907, there was a severe gale, the wind
blowing up-Channel, heaping the seas to the base of the cliffs, and
leaving a lagoon at the turn of the tide.  On the morning of which I
speak the wind had abated, and all Nature was newly washed and fresh.
It was impossible to work upon so delightful a day, and I strolled out
before breakfast to enjoy the exquisite air.  I walked along the cliff
path which led to the steep descent to the beach.  As I walked I heard
a shout behind me, and there was Harold Stackhurst waving his hand in
cheery greeting.

"What a morning, Mr. Holmes!  I thought I should see you out."

"Going for a swim, I see."

"At your old tricks again," he laughed, patting his bulging pocket.
"Yes.  McPherson started early, and I expect I may find him there."

Fitzroy McPherson was the science master, a fine upstanding young
fellow whose life had been crippled by heart trouble following
rheumatic fever.  He was a natural athlete, however, and excelled in
every game which did not throw too great a strain upon him.  Summer and
winter he went for his swim, and, as I am a swimmer myself, I have
often joined him.

At this moment we saw the man himself.  His head showed above the edge
of the cliff where the path ends.  Then his whole figure appeared at
the top, staggering like a drunken man.  The next instant he threw up
his hands, and, with a terrible cry, fell upon his face.  Stackhurst
and I rushed forward--it may have been fifty yards--and turned him on
his back.  He was obviously dying.  Those glazed sunken eyes and
dreadful livid cheeks could mean nothing else.  One glimmer of life
came into his face for an instant, and he uttered two or three words
with an eager air of warning.  They were slurred and indistinct, but to
my ear the last of them, which burst in a shriek from his lips, were
"the lion's mane."  It was utterly irrelevant and unintelligible, and
yet I could twist the sound into no other sense.  Then he half raised
himself from the ground, threw his arms into the air and fell forward
on his side.  He was dead.

My companion was paralysed by the sudden horror of it, but I, as may
well be imagined, had every sense on the alert.  And I had need, for it
was speedily evident that we were in the presence of an extraordinary
case.  The man was dressed only in his Burberry overcoat, his trousers,
and an unlaced pair of canvas shoes.  As he fell over, his Burberry,
which had been simply thrown round his shoulders, slipped off, exposing
his trunk.  We stared at it in amazement.  His back was covered with
dark red lines as though he had been terribly flogged by a thin wire
scourge.  The instrument with which this punishment had been inflicted
was clearly flexible, for the long, angry weals curved round his
shoulders and ribs.  There was blood dripping down his chin, for he had
bitten through his lower lip in the paroxysm of his agony.  His drawn
and distorted face told how terrible that agony had been.

I was kneeling and Stackhurst standing by the body when a shadow fell
across us, and we found that Ian Murdoch was by our side.  Murdoch was
the mathematical coach at the establishment, a tall, dark, thin man, so
taciturn and aloof that none can be said to have been his friend.  He
seemed to live in some high, abstract region of surds and conic
sections with little to connect him with ordinary life.  He was looked
upon as an oddity by the students, and would have been their butt, but
there was some strange outlandish blood in the man, which showed itself
not only in his coal-black eyes and swarthy face, but also in
occasional outbreaks of temper, which could only be described as
ferocious.  On one occasion, being plagued by a little dog belonging to
McPherson, he had caught the creature up and hurled it through the
plate-glass window, an action for which Stackhurst would certainly have
given him his dismissal had he not been a very valuable teacher.  Such
was the strange, complex man who now appeared beside us.  He seemed to
be honestly shocked at the sight before him, though the incident of the
dog may show that there was no great sympathy between the dead man and
himself.

"Poor fellow!  Poor fellow!  What can I do?  How can I help?"

"Were you with him?  Can you tell us what has happened?"

"No, no, I was late this morning.  I was not on the beach at all.  I
have come straight from The Gables.  What can I do?"

"You can hurry to the police-station at Fulworth.  Report the matter at
once."

Without a word he made off at top speed, and I proceeded to take the
matter in hand, while Stackhurst, dazed at this tragedy, remained by
the body.  My first task naturally was to note who was on the beach.
From the top of the path I could see the whole sweep of it, and it was
absolutely deserted save that two or three dark figures could be seen
far away moving towards the village of Fulworth.  Having satisfied
myself upon this point, I walked slowly down the path.  There was clay
or soft marl mixed with the chalk, and every here and there I saw the
same footstep, both ascending and descending.  No one else had gone
down to the beach by this track that morning.  At one place I observed
the print of an open hand with the fingers towards the incline.  This
could only mean that poor McPherson had fallen as he ascended.  There
were rounded depressions, too, which suggested that he had come down
upon his knees more than once.  At the bottom of the path was the
considerable lagoon left by the retreating tide.  At the side of it
McPherson had undressed, for there lay his towel on a rock.  It was
folded and dry, so that it would seem that after all he had never
entered the water.  Once or twice as I hunted round amid the hard
shingle I came on little patches of sand where the print of his canvas
shoe, and also of his naked foot, could be seen.  The latter fact
proved that he had made all ready to bathe, though the towel indicated
that he had not actually done so.

And here was the problem clearly defined--as strange a one as had ever
confronted me.  The man had not been on the beach more than a quarter
of an hour at the most.  Stackhurst had followed him from The Gables,
so there could be no doubt about that.  He had gone to bathe and had
stripped, as the naked footsteps showed.  Then he had suddenly huddled
on his clothes again--they were all dishevelled and unfastened--and he
had returned without bathing, or at any rate without drying himself.
And the reason for his change of purpose had been that he had been
scourged in some savage, inhuman fashion, tortured until he bit his lip
through in his agony, and was left with only strength enough to crawl
away and to die.  Who had done this barbarous deed?  There were, it is
true, small grottos and caves in the base of the cliffs, but the low
sun shone directly into them, and there was no place for concealment.
Then, again, there were those distant figures on the beach.  They
seemed too far away to have been connected with the crime, and the
broad lagoon in which McPherson had intended to bathe lay between him
and them, lapping up to the rocks.  On the sea two or three
fishing-boats were at no great distance.  Their occupants might be
examined at our leisure.  There were several roads for inquiry, but
none which led to any very obvious goal.

When I at last returned to the body I found that a little group of
wandering folk had gathered round it.  Stackhurst was, of course, still
there, and Ian Murdoch had just arrived with Anderson, the village
constable, a big, ginger-moustached man of the slow, solid Sussex
breed--a breed which covers much good sense under a heavy, silent
exterior.  He listened to everything, took note of all we said, and
finally drew me aside.

"I'd be glad of your advice, Mr. Holmes.  This is a big thing for me to
handle, and I'll hear of it from Lewes if I go wrong."

I advised him to send for his immediate superior, and for a doctor;
also to allow nothing to be moved, and as few fresh footmarks as
possible to be made, until they came.  In the meantime I searched the
dead man's pockets.  There were his handkerchief, a large knife, and a
small folding card-case.  From this projected a slip of paper, which I
unfolded and handed to the constable.  There was written on it in a
scrawling, feminine hand: "I will be there, you may be sure.--Maudie."
It read like a love affair, an assignation, though when and where were
a blank.  The constable replaced it in the card-case and returned it
with the other things to the pockets of the Burberry.  Then, as nothing
more suggested itself, I walked back to my house for breakfast, having
first arranged that the base of the cliffs should be thoroughly
searched.


Stackhurst was round in an hour or two to tell me that the body had
been removed to The Gables, where the inquest would be held.  He
brought with him some serious and definite news.  As I expected,
nothing had been found in the small caves below the cliff, but he had
examined the papers in McPherson's desk, and there were several which
showed an intimate correspondence with a certain Miss Maud Bellamy, of
Fulworth.  We had then established the identity of the writer of the
note.

"The police have the letters," he explained.  "I could not bring them.
But there is no doubt that it was a serious love affair.  I see no
reason, however, to connect it with that horrible happening save,
indeed, that the lady had made an appointment with him."

"But hardly at a bathing-pool which all of you were in the habit of
using," I remarked.

"It is mere chance," said he, "that several of the students were not
with McPherson."

"Was it mere chance?"

Stackhurst knit his brows in thought.

"Ian Murdoch held them back," said he; "he would insist upon some
algebraic demonstration before breakfast.  Poor chap, he is dreadfully
cut up about it all."

"And yet I gather that they were not friends."

"At one time they were not.  But for a year or more Murdoch has been as
near to McPherson as he ever could be to anyone.  He is not of a very
sympathetic disposition by nature."

"So I understand.  I seem to remember your telling me once about a
quarrel over the ill-usage of a dog."

"That blew over all right."

"But left some vindictive feeling, perhaps."

"No, no; I am sure they were real friends."

"Well, then, we must explore the matter of the girl.  Do you know her?"

"Everyone knows her.  She is the beauty of the neighbourhood--a real
beauty, Holmes, who would draw attention everywhere.  I knew that
McPherson was attracted by her, but I had no notion that it had gone so
far as these letters would seem to indicate."

"But who is she?"

"She is the daughter of old Tom Bellamy, who owns all the boats and
bathing-cots at Fulworth.  He was a fisherman to start with, but is now
a man of some substance.  He and his son William run the business."

"Shall we walk into Fulworth and see them?"

"On what pretext?"

"Oh, we can easily find a pretext.  After all, this poor man did not
ill-use himself in this outrageous way.  Some human hand was on the
handle of that scourge, if indeed it was a scourge which inflicted the
injuries.  His circle of acquaintances in this lonely place was surely
limited.  Let us follow it up in every direction and we can hardly fail
to come upon the motive, which in turn should lead us to the criminal."

It would have been a pleasant walk across the thyme-scented Downs had
our minds not been poisoned by the tragedy we had witnessed.  The
village of Fulworth lies in a hollow curving in a semicircle round the
bay.  Behind the old-fashioned hamlet several modern houses have been
built upon the rising ground.  It was to one of these that Stackhurst
guided me.

"That's The Haven, as Bellamy called it.  The one with the corner tower
and slate roof.  Not bad for a man who started with nothing but----  By
Jove, look at that!"

The garden gate of The Haven had opened and a man had emerged.  There
was no mistaking that tall, angular, straggling figure.  It was Ian
Murdoch, the mathematician.  A moment later we confronted him upon the
road.

"Hullo!" said Stackhurst.  The man nodded, gave us a sideways glance
from his curious dark eyes, and would have passed us, but his principal
pulled him up.

"What were you doing there?" he asked.

Murdoch's face flushed with anger.  "I am your subordinate, sir, under
your roof.  I am not aware that I owe you any account of my private
actions."

Stackhurst's nerves were near the surface after all he had endured.
Otherwise, perhaps, he would have waited.  Now he lost his temper
completely.

"In the circumstances your answer is pure impertinence, Mr. Murdoch."

"Your own question might perhaps come under the same heading."

"This is not the first time that I have had to overlook your
insubordinate ways.  It will certainly be the last.  You will kindly
make fresh arrangements for your future as speedily as you can."

"I had intended to do so.  I have lost to-day the only person who made
The Gables habitable."

He strode off upon his way, while Stackhurst, with angry eyes, stood
glaring after him.  "Is he not an impossible, intolerable man?" he
cried.

The one thing that impressed itself forcibly upon my mind was that Mr.
Ian Murdoch was taking the first chance to open a path of escape from
the scene of the crime.  Suspicion, vague and nebulous, was now
beginning to take outline in my mind.  Perhaps the visit to the
Bellamys might throw some further light upon the matter.  Stackhurst
pulled himself together and we went forward to the house.

Mr. Bellamy proved to be a middle-aged man with a flaming red beard.
He seemed to be in a very angry mood, and his face was soon as florid
as his hair.

"No, sir, I do not desire any particulars.  My son here"--indicating a
powerful young man, with a heavy, sullen face, in the corner of the
sitting-room--"is of one mind with me that Mr. McPherson's attentions
to Maud were insulting.  Yes, sir, the word 'marriage' was never
mentioned, and yet there were letters and meetings, and a great deal
more of which neither of us could approve.  She has no mother, and we
are her only guardians.  We are determined----"

But the words were taken from his mouth by the appearance of the lady
herself.  There was no gainsaying that she would have graced any
assembly in the world.  Who could have imagined that so rare a flower
would grow from such a root and in such an atmosphere?  Women have
seldom been an attraction to me, for my brain has always governed my
heart, but I could not look upon her perfect clear-cut face, with all
the soft freshness of the Downlands in her delicate colouring, without
realizing that no young man would cross her path unscathed.  Such was
the girl who had pushed open the door and stood now, wide-eyed and
intense, in front of Harold Stackhurst.

"I know already that Fitzroy is dead," she said.  "Do not be afraid to
tell me the particulars."

"This other gentleman of yours let us know the news," explained the
father.

"There is no reason why my sister should be brought into the matter,"
growled the younger man.  The sister turned a sharp, fierce look upon
him.  "This is my business, William.  Kindly leave me to manage it in
my own way.  By all accounts there has been a crime committed.  If I
can help to show who did it, it is the least I can do for him who is
gone."

She listened to a short account from my companion, with a composed
concentration which showed me that she possessed strong character as
well as great beauty.  Maud Bellamy will always remain in my memory as
a most complete and remarkable woman.  It seems that she already knew
me by sight, for she turned to me at the end.

"Bring them to justice, Mr. Holmes.  You have my sympathy and my help,
whoever they may be."  It seemed to me that she glanced defiantly at
her father and brother as she spoke.

"Thank you," said I.  "I value a woman's instinct in such matters.  You
use the word 'they.'  You think that more than one was concerned?"

"I knew Mr. McPherson well enough to be aware that he was a brave and a
strong man.  No single person could ever have inflicted such an outrage
upon him."

"Might I have one word with you alone?"

"I tell you, Maud, not to mix yourself up in the matter," cried her
father angrily.

She looked at me helplessly.  "What can I do?"

"The whole world will know the facts presently, so there can be no harm
if I discuss them here," said I.  "I should have preferred privacy, but
if your father will not allow it, he must share the deliberations."
Then I spoke of the note which had been found in the dead man's pocket.
"It is sure to be produced at the inquest.  May I ask you to throw any
light upon it that you can?"

"I see no reason for mystery," she answered.  "We were engaged to be
married, and we only kept it secret because Fitzroy's uncle, who is
very old and said to be dying, might have disinherited him if he had
married against his wish.  There was no other reason."

"You could have told us," growled Mr. Bellamy.

"So I would, father, if you had ever shown sympathy."

"I object to my girl picking up with men outside her own station."

"It was your prejudice against him which prevented us from telling you.
As to this appointment"--she fumbled in her dress and produced a
crumpled note--"it was in answer to this."


"DEAREST," ran the message: "The old place on the beach just after
sunset on Tuesday.  It is the only time I can get away.--F.M."


"Tuesday was to-day, and I had meant to meet him to-night."

I turned over the paper.  "This never came by post.  How did you get
it?"

"I would rather not answer that question.  It has really nothing to do
with the matter which you are investigating.  But anything which bears
upon that I will most freely answer."

She was as good as her word, but there was nothing which was helpful in
our investigation.  She had no reason to think that her fiancé had any
hidden enemy, but she admitted that she had had several warm admirers.

"May I ask if Mr. Ian Murdoch was one of them?"

She blushed and seemed confused.

"There was a time when I thought he was.  But that was all changed when
he understood the relations between Fitzroy and myself."

Again the shadow round this strange man seemed to me to be taking more
definite shape.  His record must be examined.  His rooms must be
privately searched.  Stackhurst was a willing collaborator, for in his
mind also suspicions were forming.  We returned from our visit to The
Haven with the hope that one free end of this tangled skein was already
in our hands.


A week passed.  The inquest had thrown no light upon the matter and had
been adjourned for further evidence.  Stackhurst had made discreet
inquiry about his subordinate, and there had been a superficial search
of his room, but without result.  Personally, I had gone over the whole
ground again, both physically and mentally, but with no new
conclusions.  In all my chronicles the reader will find no case which
brought me so completely to the limit of my powers.  Even my
imagination could conceive no solution to the mystery.  And then there
came the incident of the dog.

It was my old housekeeper who heard of it first by that strange
wireless by which such people collect the news of the country-side.

"Sad story this, sir, about Mr. McPherson's dog," said she one evening.

I do not encourage such conversations, but the words arrested my
attention.

"What of Mr. McPherson's dog?"

"Dead, sir.  Died of grief for its master."

"Who told you this?"

"Why, sir, everyone is talking of it.  It took on terrible, and has
eaten nothing for a week.  Then to-day two of the young gentlemen from
The Gables found it dead--down on the beach, sir, at the very place
where its master met his end."

"At the very place."  The words stood out clear in my memory.  Some dim
perception that the matter was vital rose in my mind.  That the dog
should die was after the beautiful, faithful nature of dogs.  But 'in
the very place'!  Why should this lonely beach be fatal to it?  Was it
possible that it also, had been sacrificed to some revengeful feud?
Was it possible----?  Yes, the perception was dim, but already
something was building up in my mind.  In a few minutes I was on my way
to The Gables, where I found Stackhurst in his study.  At my request he
sent for Sudbury and Blount, the two students who had found the dog.

"Yes, it lay on the very edge of the pool," said one of them.  "It must
have followed the trail of its dead master."

I saw the faithful little creature, an Airedale terrier, laid out upon
the mat in the hall.  The body was stiff and rigid, the eyes
projecting, and the limbs contorted.  There was agony in every line of
it.

From The Gables I walked down to the bathing-pool.  The sun had sunk
and the shadow of the great cliff lay black across the water, which
glimmered dully like a sheet of lead. The place was deserted and there
was no sign of life save for two sea-birds circling and screaming
overhead.  In the fading light I could dimly make out the little dog's
spoor upon the sand round the very rock on which his master's towel had
been laid.  For a long time I stood in deep meditation while the
shadows grew darker around me.  My mind was filled with racing
thoughts.  You have known what it was to be in a nightmare in which you
feel that there is some all-important thing for which you search and
which you know is there, though it remains for ever just beyond your
reach.  That was how I felt that evening as I stood alone by that place
of death.  Then at last I turned and walked slowly homewards.  I had
just reached the top of the path when it came to me.  Like a flash, I
remembered the thing for which I had so eagerly and vainly grasped.
You will know, or Watson has written in vain, that I hold a vast store
of out-of-the-way knowledge, without scientific system, but very
available for the needs of my work.  My mind is like a crowded box-room
with packets of all sorts stowed away therein--so many that I may well
have but a vague perception of what was there.  I had known that there
was something which might bear upon this matter.  It was still vague,
but at least I knew how I could make it clear.  It was monstrous,
incredible, and yet it was always a possibility.  I would test it to
the full.  There is a great garret in my little house which is stuffed
with books.  It was into this that I plunged and rummaged for an hour.
At the end of that time I emerged with a little chocolate and silver
volume.  Eagerly I turned up the chapter of which I had a dim
remembrance.  Yes, it was indeed a far-fetched and unlikely
proposition, and yet I could not be at rest until I had made sure if it
might, indeed, be so.  It was late when I retired, with my mind eagerly
awaiting the work of the morrow.

But that work met with an annoying interruption.  I had hardly
swallowed my early cup of tea and was starting for the beach when I had
a call from Inspector Bardie of the Sussex Constabulary--a steady,
solid, bovine man with thoughtful eyes, which looked at me now with a
very troubled expression.

"I know your immense experience, sir," said he.  "This is quite
unofficial, of course, and need go no farther.  But I am fairly up
against it in this McPherson case.  The question is, shall I make an
arrest, or shall I not?"

"Meaning Mr. Ian Murdoch?"

"Yes, sir.  There is really no one else when you come to think of it.
That's the advantage of this solitude.  We narrow it down to a very
small compass.  If he did not do it, then who did?"

"What have you against him?"

He had gleaned along the same furrows as I had.  There was Murdoch's
character and the mystery which seemed to hang round the man.  His
furious bursts of temper, as shown in the incident of the dog.  The
fact that he had quarrelled with McPherson in the past, and that there
was some reason to think that he might have resented his attentions to
Miss Bellamy.  He had all my points, but no fresh ones, save that
Murdoch seemed to be making every preparation for departure.

"What would my position be if I let him slip away with all this
evidence against him?"  The burly, phlegmatic man was sorely troubled
in his mind.

"Consider," I said, "all the essential gaps in your case.  On the
morning of the crime he can surely prove an alibi.  He had been with
his scholars till the last moment, and within a few minutes of
McPherson's appearance he came upon us from behind.  Then bear in mind
the absolute impossibility that he could single-handed have inflicted
this outrage upon a man quite as strong as himself.  Finally, there is
this question of the instrument with which these injuries were
inflicted."

"What could it be but a scourge or flexible whip of some sort?"

"Have you examined the marks?" I asked.

"I have seen them.  So has the doctor."

"But I have examined them very carefully with a lens.  They have
peculiarities."

"What are they, Mr. Holmes?"

I stepped to my bureau and brought out an enlarged photograph.  "This
is my method in such cases," I explained.

"You certainly do things thoroughly, Mr. Holmes."

"I should hardly be what I am if I did not.  Now let us consider this
weal which extends round the right shoulder.  Do you observe nothing
remarkable?"

"I can't say I do."

"Surely it is evident that it is unequal in its intensity.  There is a
dot of extravasated blood, here, and another there.  There are similar
indications in this other weal down here.  What can that mean?"

"I have no idea.  Have you?"

"Perhaps I have.  Perhaps I haven't.  I may be able to say more soon.
Anything which will define what made that mark will bring us a long way
towards the criminal."

"It is, of course, an absurd idea," said the policeman, "but if a
red-hot net of wire had been laid across the back, then these
better-marked points would represent where the meshes crossed each
other."

"A most ingenious comparison.  Or shall we say a very stiff
cat-o'-nine-tails with small hard knots upon it?"

"By Jove, Mr. Holmes, I think you have hit it."

"Or there may be some very different cause, Mr. Bardie.  But your case
is far too weak for an arrest.  Besides, we have those last
words--'Lion's Mane.'"

"I have wondered whether Ian----"

"Yes, I have considered that.  If the second word had borne any
resemblance to Murdoch--but it did not.  He gave it almost in a shriek.
I am sure that it was 'Mane.'"

"Have you no alternative, Mr. Holmes?"

"Perhaps I have.  But I do not care to discuss it until there is
something more solid to discuss."

"And when will that be?"

"In an hour--possibly less."

The Inspector rubbed his chin and looked at me with dubious eyes.

"I wish I could see what was in your mind, Mr. Holmes.  Perhaps it's
those fishing-boats."

"No, no; they were too far out."

"Well, then, is it Bellamy and that big son of his?  They were not too
sweet upon Mr. McPherson.  Could they have done him a mischief?"

"No, no; you won't draw me until I am ready," said I with a smile.
"Now, Inspector, we each have our own work to do.  Perhaps if you were
to meet me here at midday----?"

So far we had got when there came the tremendous interruption which was
the beginning of the end.  My outer door was flung open, there were
blundering footsteps in the passage, and Ian Murdoch staggered into the
room, pallid, dishevelled, his clothes in wild disorder, clawing with
his bony hands at the furniture to hold himself erect.  "Brandy!
Brandy!" he gasped, and fell groaning upon the sofa.

He was not alone.  Behind him came Stackhurst, hatless and panting,
almost as distrait as his companion.

"Yes, yes, brandy!" he cried.  "The man is at his last gasp.  It was
all I could do to bring him here.  He fainted twice upon the way."

Half a tumbler of the raw spirit brought about a wondrous change.  He
pushed himself up on one arm and swung his coat from off his shoulders.
"For God's sake! oil, opium, morphia!" he cried.  "Anything to ease
this infernal agony!"

The Inspector and I cried out at the sight.  There, criss-crossed upon
the man's naked shoulder, was the same strange reticulated pattern of
red, inflamed lines which had been the death-mark of Fitzroy McPherson.

The pain was evidently terrible and was more than local, for the
sufferer's breathing would stop for a time, his face would turn black,
and then with loud gasps he would clap his hand to his heart, while his
brow dropped beads of sweat.  At any moment he might die.  More and
more brandy was poured down his throat, each fresh dose bringing him
back to life.  Pads of cotton-wool soaked in salad-oil seemed to take
the agony from the strange wounds.  At last his head fell heavily upon
the cushion.  Exhausted Nature had taken refuge in its last storehouse
of vitality.  It was half a sleep and half a faint, but at least it was
ease from pain.

To question him had been impossible, but the moment we were assured of
his condition Stackhurst turned upon me.

"My God!" he cried, "what is it, Holmes?  What is it?"

"Where did you find him?"

"Down on the beach.  Exactly where poor McPherson met his end.  If this
man's heart had been weak as McPherson's was, he would not be here now.
More than once I thought he was gone as I brought him up.  It was too
far to The Gables, so I made for you."

"Did you see him on the beach?"

"I was walking on the cliff when I heard his cry.  He was at the edge
of the water, reeling about like a drunken man.  I ran down, threw some
clothes about him, and brought him up.  For Heaven's sake, Holmes, use
all the powers you have and spare no pains to lift the curse from this
place, for life is becoming unendurable.  Can you, with all your
world-wide reputation, do nothing for us?"

"I think I can, Stackhurst.  Come with me now!  And you, Inspector,
come along!  We will see if we cannot deliver this murderer into your
hands."

Leaving the unconscious man in the charge of my housekeeper, we all
three went down to the deadly lagoon.  On the shingle there was piled a
little heap of towels and clothes, left by the stricken man.  Slowly I
walked round the edge of the water, my comrades in Indian file behind
me.  Most of the pool was quite shallow, but under the cliff where the
beach was hollowed out it was four or five feet deep.  It was to this
part that a swimmer would naturally go, for it formed a beautiful
pellucid green pool as clear as crystal.  A line of rocks lay above it
at the base of the cliff, and along this I led the way, peering eagerly
into the depths beneath me.  I had reached the deepest and stillest
pool when my eyes caught that for which they were searching, and I
burst into a shout of triumph.

"Cyanea!" I cried.  "Cyanea!  Behold the Lion's Mane!"

The strange object at which I pointed did indeed look like a tangled
mass torn from the mane of a lion.  It lay upon a rocky shelf some
three feet under the water, a curious waving, vibrating, hairy creature
with streaks of silver among its yellow tresses.  It pulsated with a
slow, heavy dilation and contraction.

"It has done mischief enough.  Its day is over!" I cried.  "Help me,
Stackhurst!  Let us end the murderer for ever."

There was a big boulder just above the ledge, and we pushed it until it
fell with a tremendous splash into the water.  When the ripples had
cleared we saw that it had settled upon the ledge below.  One flapping
edge of yellow membrane showed that our victim was beneath it.  A thick
oily scum oozed out from below the stone and stained the water round,
rising slowly to the surface.

"Well, this gets me!" cried the Inspector.  "What was it, Mr. Holmes?
I'm born and bred in these parts, but I never saw such a thing.  It
don't belong to Sussex."

"Just as well for Sussex," I remarked.  "It may have been the
south-west gale that brought it up.  Come back to my house, both of
you, and I will give you the terrible experience of one who has good
reason to remember his own meeting with the same peril of the seas."


When we reached my study, we found that Murdoch was so far recovered
that he could sit up.  He was dazed in mind, and every now and then was
shaken by a paroxysm of pain.  In broken words he explained that he had
no notion what had occurred to him, save that terrific pangs had
suddenly shot through him, and that it had taken all his fortitude to
reach the bank.

"Here is a book," I said, taking up the little volume, "which first
brought light into what might have been for ever dark.  It is _Out of
Doors_, by the famous observer J. G. Wood.  Wood himself very nearly
perished from contact with this vile creature, so he wrote with a very
full knowledge.  _Cyanea Capillata_ is the miscreant's full name, and
he can be as dangerous to life as, and far more painful than, the bite
of the cobra.  Let me briefly give this extract.

"'If the bather should see a loose roundish mass of tawny membranes and
fibres, something like very large handfuls of lion's mane and silver
paper, let him beware, for this is the fearful stinger, _Cyanea
Capillata_.' Could our sinister acquaintance be more clearly described?

"He goes on to tell his own encounter with one when swimming off the
coast of Kent.  He found that the creature radiated almost invisible
filaments to the distance of fifty feet, and that anyone within that
circumference from the deadly centre was in danger of death.  Even at a
distance the effect upon Wood was almost fatal.  'The multitudinous
threads caused light scarlet lines upon the skin which on closer
examination resolved into minute dots or pustules, each dot charged as
it were with a red-hot needle making its way through the nerves.'

"The local pain was, as he explains, the least part of the exquisite
torment.  'Pangs shot through the chest, causing me to fall as if
struck by a bullet.  The pulsation would cease, and then the heart
would give six or seven leaps as if it would force its way through the
chest.'

"It nearly killed him, although he had only been exposed to it in the
disturbed ocean and not in the narrow calm waters of a bathing-pool.
He says that he could hardly recognize himself afterwards, so white,
wrinkled and shrivelled was his face.  He gulped down brandy, a whole
bottleful, and it seems to have saved his life.  There is the book,
Inspector.  I leave it with you, and you cannot doubt that it contains
a full explanation of the tragedy of poor McPherson."

"And incidentally exonerates me," remarked Ian Murdoch with a wry
smile.  "I do not blame you, Inspector, nor you, Mr. Holmes, for your
suspicions were natural.  I feel that on the very eve of my arrest I
have only cleared myself by sharing the fate of my poor friend."

"No, Mr. Murdoch.  I was already upon the track, and had I been out as
early as I intended I might well have saved you from this terrific
experience."

"But how did you know, Mr. Holmes?"

"I am an omnivorous reader with a strangely retentive memory for
trifles.  That phrase 'Lion's Mane' haunted my mind.  I knew that I had
seen it somewhere in an unexpected context.  You have seen that it does
describe the creature.  I have no doubt that it was floating on the
water when McPherson saw it, and that this phrase was the only one by
which he could convey to us a warning as to the creature which had been
his death."

"Then I, at least, am cleared," said Murdoch, rising slowly to his
feet.  "There are one or two words of explanation which I should give,
for I know the direction in which your inquiries have run.  It is true
that I loved this lady, but from the day when she chose my friend
McPherson my one desire was to help her to happiness.  I was well
content to stand aside and act as their go-between.  Often I carried
their messages, and it was because I was in their confidence and
because she was so dear to me that I hastened to tell her of my
friend's death, lest someone should forestall me in a more sudden and
heartless manner.  She would not tell you, sir, of our relations lest
you should disapprove and I might suffer.  But with your leave I must
try to get back to The Gables, for my bed will be very welcome."

Stackhurst held out his hand.  "Our nerves have all been at
concert-pitch," said he.  "Forgive what is past, Murdoch.  We shall
understand each other better in the future."  They passed out together
with their arms linked in friendly fashion.  The Inspector remained,
staring at me in silence with his ox-like eyes.

"Well, you've done it!" he cried at last.  "I had read of you, but I
never believed it.  It's wonderful!"

I was forced to shake my head.  To accept such praise was to lower
one's own standards.

"I was slow at the outset--culpably slow.  Had the body been found in
the water I could hardly have missed it.  It was the towel which misled
me.  The poor fellow had never thought to dry himself, and so I in turn
was led to believe that he had never been in the water.  Why, then,
should the attack of any water creature suggest itself to me?  That was
where I went astray.  Well, well, Inspector, I often ventured to chaff
you gentlemen of the police force, but _Cyanea Capillata_ very nearly
avenged Scotland Yard."