6. Lord Singleford’s Rasper (purple cap, black sleeves).

      “We scratched our other one, and put all hopes on your word,”
      said the Colonel. “Why, what is that? Silver Blaze favourite?”

      “Five to four against Silver Blaze!” roared the ring. “Five to
      four against Silver Blaze! Five to fifteen against Desborough!
      Five to four on the field!”

      “There are the numbers up,” I cried. “They are all six there.”

      “All six there? Then my horse is running,” cried the Colonel in
      great agitation. “But I don’t see him. My colours have not
      passed.”

      “Only five have passed. This must be he.”

      As I spoke a powerful bay horse swept out from the weighing
      enclosure and cantered past us, bearing on its back the
      well-known black and red of the Colonel.

      “That’s not my horse,” cried the owner. “That beast has not a
      white hair upon its body. What is this that you have done, Mr.
      Holmes?”

      “Well, well, let us see how he gets on,” said my friend,
      imperturbably. For a few minutes he gazed through my field-glass.
      “Capital! An excellent start!” he cried suddenly. “There they
      are, coming round the curve!”

      From our drag we had a superb view as they came up the straight.
      The six horses were so close together that a carpet could have
      covered them, but half way up the yellow of the Mapleton stable
      showed to the front. Before they reached us, however,
      Desborough’s bolt was shot, and the Colonel’s horse, coming away
      with a rush, passed the post a good six lengths before its rival,
      the Duke of Balmoral’s Iris making a bad third.

      “It’s my race, anyhow,” gasped the Colonel, passing his hand over
      his eyes. “I confess that I can make neither head nor tail of it.
      Don’t you think that you have kept up your mystery long enough,
      Mr. Holmes?”

      “Certainly, Colonel, you shall know everything. Let us all go
      round and have a look at the horse together. Here he is,” he
      continued, as we made our way into the weighing enclosure, where
      only owners and their friends find admittance. “You have only to
      wash his face and his leg in spirits of wine, and you will find
      that he is the same old Silver Blaze as ever.”

      “You take my breath away!”

      “I found him in the hands of a faker, and took the liberty of
      running him just as he was sent over.”

      “My dear sir, you have done wonders. The horse looks very fit and
      well. It never went better in its life. I owe you a thousand
      apologies for having doubted your ability. You have done me a
      great service by recovering my horse. You would do me a greater
      still if you could lay your hands on the murderer of John
      Straker.”

      “I have done so,” said Holmes quietly.

      The Colonel and I stared at him in amazement. “You have got him!
      Where is he, then?”

      “He is here.”

      “Here! Where?”

      “In my company at the present moment.”

      The Colonel flushed angrily. “I quite recognise that I am under
      obligations to you, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “but I must regard what
      you have just said as either a very bad joke or an insult.”

      Sherlock Holmes laughed. “I assure you that I have not associated
      you with the crime, Colonel,” said he. “The real murderer is
      standing immediately behind you.” He stepped past and laid his
      hand upon the glossy neck of the thoroughbred.

      “The horse!” cried both the Colonel and myself.

      “Yes, the horse. And it may lessen his guilt if I say that it was
      done in self-defence, and that John Straker was a man who was
      entirely unworthy of your confidence. But there goes the bell,
      and as I stand to win a little on this next race, I shall defer a
      lengthy explanation until a more fitting time.”

      We had the corner of a Pullman car to ourselves that evening as
      we whirled back to London, and I fancy that the journey was a
      short one to Colonel Ross as well as to myself, as we listened to
      our companion’s narrative of the events which had occurred at the
      Dartmoor training-stables upon the Monday night, and the means by
      which he had unravelled them.

      “I confess,” said he, “that any theories which I had formed from
      the newspaper reports were entirely erroneous. And yet there were
      indications there, had they not been overlaid by other details
      which concealed their true import. I went to Devonshire with the
      conviction that Fitzroy Simpson was the true culprit, although,
      of course, I saw that the evidence against him was by no means
      complete. It was while I was in the carriage, just as we reached
      the trainer’s house, that the immense significance of the curried
      mutton occurred to me. You may remember that I was distrait, and
      remained sitting after you had all alighted. I was marvelling in
      my own mind how I could possibly have overlooked so obvious a
      clue.”

      “I confess,” said the Colonel, “that even now I cannot see how it
      helps us.”

      “It was the first link in my chain of reasoning. Powdered opium
      is by no means tasteless. The flavour is not disagreeable, but it
      is perceptible. Were it mixed with any ordinary dish the eater
      would undoubtedly detect it, and would probably eat no more. A
      curry was exactly the medium which would disguise this taste. By
      no possible supposition could this stranger, Fitzroy Simpson,
      have caused curry to be served in the trainer’s family that
      night, and it is surely too monstrous a coincidence to suppose
      that he happened to come along with powdered opium upon the very
      night when a dish happened to be served which would disguise the
      flavour. That is unthinkable. Therefore Simpson becomes
      eliminated from the case, and our attention centres upon Straker
      and his wife, the only two people who could have chosen curried
      mutton for supper that night. The opium was added after the dish
      was set aside for the stable-boy, for the others had the same for
      supper with no ill effects. Which of them, then, had access to
      that dish without the maid seeing them?

      “Before deciding that question I had grasped the significance of
      the silence of the dog, for one true inference invariably
      suggests others. The Simpson incident had shown me that a dog was
      kept in the stables, and yet, though some one had been in and had
      fetched out a horse, he had not barked enough to arouse the two
      lads in the loft. Obviously the midnight visitor was some one
      whom the dog knew well.

      “I was already convinced, or almost convinced, that John Straker
      went down to the stables in the dead of the night and took out
      Silver Blaze. For what purpose? For a dishonest one, obviously,
      or why should he drug his own stable-boy? And yet I was at a loss
      to know why. There have been cases before now where trainers have
      made sure of great sums of money by laying against their own
      horses, through agents, and then preventing them from winning by
      fraud. Sometimes it is a pulling jockey. Sometimes it is some
      surer and subtler means. What was it here? I hoped that the
      contents of his pockets might help me to form a conclusion.

      “And they did so. You cannot have forgotten the singular knife
      which was found in the dead man’s hand, a knife which certainly
      no sane man would choose for a weapon. It was, as Dr. Watson told
      us, a form of knife which is used for the most delicate
      operations known in surgery. And it was to be used for a delicate
      operation that night. You must know, with your wide experience of
      turf matters, Colonel Ross, that it is possible to make a slight
      nick upon the tendons of a horse’s ham, and to do it
      subcutaneously, so as to leave absolutely no trace. A horse so
      treated would develop a slight lameness, which would be put down
      to a strain in exercise or a touch of rheumatism, but never to
      foul play.”

      “Villain! Scoundrel!” cried the Colonel.

      “We have here the explanation of why John Straker wished to take
      the horse out on to the moor. So spirited a creature would have
      certainly roused the soundest of sleepers when it felt the prick
      of the knife. It was absolutely necessary to do it in the open
      air.”

      “I have been blind!” cried the Colonel. “Of course that was why
      he needed the candle, and struck the match.”

      “Undoubtedly. But in examining his belongings I was fortunate
      enough to discover not only the method of the crime, but even its
      motives. As a man of the world, Colonel, you know that men do not
      carry other people’s bills about in their pockets. We have most
      of us quite enough to do to settle our own. I at once concluded
      that Straker was leading a double life, and keeping a second
      establishment. The nature of the bill showed that there was a
      lady in the case, and one who had expensive tastes. Liberal as
      you are with your servants, one can hardly expect that they can
      buy twenty-guinea walking dresses for their ladies. I questioned
      Mrs. Straker as to the dress without her knowing it, and having
      satisfied myself that it had never reached her, I made a note of
      the milliner’s address, and felt that by calling there with
      Straker’s photograph I could easily dispose of the mythical
      Derbyshire.

      “From that time on all was plain. Straker had led out the horse
      to a hollow where his light would be invisible. Simpson in his
      flight had dropped his cravat, and Straker had picked it up—with
      some idea, perhaps, that he might use it in securing the horse’s
      leg. Once in the hollow, he had got behind the horse and had
      struck a light; but the creature frightened at the sudden glare,
      and with the strange instinct of animals feeling that some
      mischief was intended, had lashed out, and the steel shoe had
      struck Straker full on the forehead. He had already, in spite of
      the rain, taken off his overcoat in order to do his delicate
      task, and so, as he fell, his knife gashed his thigh. Do I make
      it clear?”

      “Wonderful!” cried the Colonel. “Wonderful! You might have been
      there!”

      “My final shot was, I confess a very long one. It struck me that
      so astute a man as Straker would not undertake this delicate
      tendon-nicking without a little practice. What could he practice
      on? My eyes fell upon the sheep, and I asked a question which,
      rather to my surprise, showed that my surmise was correct.

      “When I returned to London I called upon the milliner, who had
      recognised Straker as an excellent customer of the name of
      Derbyshire, who had a very dashing wife, with a strong partiality
      for expensive dresses. I have no doubt that this woman had
      plunged him over head and ears in debt, and so led him into this
      miserable plot.”

      “You have explained all but one thing,” cried the Colonel. “Where
      was the horse?”

      “Ah, it bolted, and was cared for by one of your neighbours. We
      must have an amnesty in that direction, I think. This is Clapham
      Junction, if I am not mistaken, and we shall be in Victoria in
      less than ten minutes. If you care to smoke a cigar in our rooms,
      Colonel, I shall be happy to give you any other details which
      might interest you.”